      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-05-21
                       meeting.product.1996-05-21
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-05-22

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Alex Parnes, Clive Harris, Richard Brooksby, Mark Preece, Arthor 
Weinstein, and Ken Jackson met at 2QC and 1CC in order to set up the Memory 
Management "Quartet" and start the process of organizing the production 
process.  This document was edited from original notes by Clive Harris.


LAUNCH

.launch: Alex had great pleasure in declaring the first memory management 
product
meeting open.  God bless all who sail in her.


QUARTET

.quartet: Alex described the purpose and composition of the de-facto Harlequin 
"quartet" management model.

.quartet.role: The Quartet is the decision making body for the products.  It is 
independent, but accountable to senior management.

.quartet.pmm: The Product Marketing Manager deals with issues relating to the 
marketing of the product, and also with legal issues.

.quartet.pm: The Product Manager is the customers' representative as far as 
development is concerned, creating specifications from the marketing 
specification, and ensuring the product meets those specs.

.quartet.qa: The QA Manager assists the Product Manager in checking that the 
product meets the specifications by providing and managing testing and 
evaluation resources.

.quartet.dm: The Project (or Development) Manager manages the creation and 
development of the product in order to meet the Product Manager's 
specifications.

.quartet.doc: Richard asked how documentation fitted into the model.  Alex 
answered that it varied, but that documentation should generally be considered 
part of the development and delivered to the product manager as such.  
.quartet.doc.req: The documentation requirements are determined by the Quartet.


PRODUCT

.prod: Richard described the MM product.

.prod.multi: There is no 'one best solution' to all MM problems. Our approach 
will be to allow users to configure our MPS to achieve the optimal results for 
their own application. 
.prod.princ: Two basic principles behind our MM product:

  .prod.princ.efficiency: Efficient use of resources
  .prod.princ.function: Capable of functional enhancement (measurement, gc 
configuration etc).

.prod.levels: There are 5 likely levels by which a user will embrace our MM 
technology:

  .prod.levels.drop: 'Drop in'
  .prod.levels.pool: Change over to the MPS (Memory Pool Subsystem) API and 
start making use of memory pool class selection
  .prod.levels.fb: Use feedback to influence pool class selection
  .prod.levels.tune: Use feedback to tune up the application using a fairly 
deep understanding of the behaviour facilitated by the tools.
  .prod.levels.bespoke: Approach Harlequin for custom solution.


MARKET REQUIREMENTS

.req.market: Some tentative marketing requirements, to be analysed and enlarged 
on in the product definition:

  .req.market.trial: tangible benefit within half a day,
  .req.market.roi: good return on investment at every stage,
  .req.market.build: build markets for further memory management products and 
consultancy.


STATUS

.status: Where is HQN MM today?

  .status.dylan: GC in Dylan using MPS
  .status.ep: MPS is being integrated into the Core RIP
  .status.tools: No tools yet (vital for commercially attractive product)
  .status.port: VERY portable


QA MODEL

.qa.finish: MM group will produce a 'finished' product by internal testing.

.qa.intenal: MM deliveries into Dylan, Scriptworks etc will be QA's by those 
teams (and their QA resources) bugs will filter back into MM group as required.

.qa.external: It was noted that QA for the external product would require a 
person familiar with the C/C++ development world - certainly on Intel platforms.


DECISIONS

.decision.html: Policy decision: Online docs will be provided in HTML.  We WILL 
NOT commit ourselves to shipping an HTML browser.


ACTIONS

.act.details: Breakout groups to form as appropriate to size QA effort, Doc 
effort, Development effort, Support effort.  All/Richard to co-ordinate and 
select.

.act.bless: Alex to confirm with Jo and Sang that this project has their formal 
blessing.  [Maybe this waits for a draft definition?  richard 1996-05-22]

.act.define: Full product definition to be agreed by end July.  
CliveH/Richard/all.

.act.tools: It was noted that a large obvious resource shortage is in the 
GUI/tools building area.  We will need these skills urgently soon.

.act.launch: Tentative launch date for a commercial product is early 1997.  
[This depends strongly on results of market analysis, definition, and 
subsequent planning.  richard 1996-05-22]


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-06-07 15:00 BST

