                NOTES OF THE MM/LFCS MEETING, 1996-09-23
                        meeting.lfcs.1996-09-23
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-09-23

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> met Rod Burstall, Healf Goguen, and Paul 
Jackson at Barrington Hall to discuss the progress of the MM/LFCS collaboration.


AGENDA

1. Resolve issues over use of source material, its proprietary nature, and 
possible conflict with goal.lfcs(1).publish.

2. Review PVS results from Paul.

3. Paper targets.

4. Plan future work.

5. CAML concurrent GC.  Described in CAML and provided in TLA.

6. Status report from Harlequin.

7. TCL/Tk animation of GC.

8. Arrange next meeting.


SECRECY

Richard explained the purpose of protecting MM intellectual property: to 
maintain value of the MM expertise for Harlequin.  The suggested that LFCS 
might need to choose their subject areas and sources carefully if they feel a 
great need to publish.

Paul asks which secrets become available after publication of the software.  
Richard responded that this had yet to be resolved, but for example the fact 
that we're doing concurrent and co-operating GC will become public but not the 
techniques involved in how it is done.

Paul expressed his concern that he needed to publish in order to support his 
grant applications.  Richard suggested that Harlequin could provide a 
testimonial letter which could support an application.  This would be useful, 
but in any case Paul wants to publish, and would be disappointed if work was 
not publishable.

Richard suggested some ways in which specific instances of techniques could be 
revealed without compromising valuable abstractions.  Essentially, the link 
between a specific technique and the abstraction remains secret, so the work on 
the technique is useful to both Harlequin and the public.

Rod pointed out that abstractions for proofs are often different to those for 
implementation.  Richard agreed that this is true and the value of Harlequin's 
proprietary abstractions could be preserved.



Paul asked to visit Glasgow and talk to Peter Dickman about distributed GC.  
Richard said it wasn't particularly relevant to Harlequin but would be 
interesting.


PAUL'S PVS WORK

Paul presented a PVS specification of part of a GC tracer and a proof of a 
theorem and corollary.  [This work will be attached when it is received in 
electronic form. -- richard 1996-09-24]

Richard discussed the use of Larch LCLint within the MM Project and suggested 
exploring a possible crossover between Larch and PVS specifications, leading to 
direct use of the specification in the MM Group.


PLANNING

Paul outlined various specific directions he could work in, based on his 
specification.

Richard suggested that having some definite target papers to work towards would 
help focus.  He suggested that, by the next meeting, we should have abstracts 
of possible papers to work on.

Richard suggested a direction for publication of developing a _technique_ for 
verification by modelling (top-down) rather than verification of code 
(bottom-up).  Discussion followed.

Richard also produce some concrete targets for Harlequin and the product.  For 
this we also need realistic commitments of work from BrianM.


CAML COLLECTOR VERIFICATION

[The paper will be attached here when it is received in electronic form. -- 
richard 1996-09-24]

Since these papers George Gauntier spent 9 months working on getting a 
mechanical proof in an extension of Larch that handle TLA logic.  Issues: 
Whether abstraction is possible from the level this paper works from.  Can 
verification be done in fewer steps with detailed refinements?  Even at this 
level of detail can things be automated more?  Also interesting 
divide-and-conquer techniques.


NOTES

Healf will be in Cambridge for the Michaelmas Term.

Tcl/TK animation not studied because of lack of time and access to suitable 
software.  Will do at next meeting in Edinburgh.

Status of MM work was discussed informally over lunch.


ACTIONS

.act.john: Richard will take a look at John Longley's paper and assess its 
confidentiality so that John might be able to publish it.

.act.pvs: Paul will mail his PVS stuff to mm-lfcs.

.act.url: Paul will send URLs for the CAML collector paper to mm-lfcs.

.act.caml: Richard will look at the CAML paper and pick out subset of 
interesting operations specified there.

.act.abs: We will all think about possible target papers.

.act.healf: Healf to arrange to visit the Cambridge offices soon to do further 
work on the ML model with Richard and BrianM.


NEXT MEETING

.next: Provisionally on 1996-11-04 at LFCS in Edinburgh.

