              NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT & PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1998-12-01
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1998-12-01

MM development/product meeting, 1998-12-01, 11:30 GMT.

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>.


PLANNING AND SCHEDULING PROCESS

Tony: I rec'd a copy of MS project yesterday (thanks Dave). Got as  far as
entering the task list that Pekka typed up. So got the raw data, now need
to bash it into a reasonable plan (it's not scheduled at the moment). Need
to come to an idea of how we're going to track this plan. My suggestion:

Every week, sometime before this meeting, we have individual meetings with
those people represented in the plan (tony, pekka, drj, plus rit from time
to time). We go over task assignments & see how we're getting on with
completing tasks. With the info I get from that I'll update the plan and
publish it by some means which I haven't yet found out. So by the time of
_this_ meeting we'll have a more accurate plan which we can discuss, decide
whether we need to amend, &c. If necessary I'll publish a new version the
next day.
Sound ok?

daveb: yes
drj: yes
pekka: yes. Publishing: best thing would be to look at the plan itself, but
we don't all have MS project.

tony: Could just print it out. Don't know how much MS Project costs.

pekka: Could be hard to read on paper.

drj: Paste into Notes?

daveb: We used to produce a plan per person in Dylan.
tony: ... but also entire group plans, which I think are even more
important for us than the dylan group.
daveb: ... and more tractable. I used to produce a complete plan for
everybody for Dylan, output as postscript and paste it into notes. Some
people had trouble reading it though.

tony: MS Project can generate HTML -- I could put it on a web server.
daveb: I tried HTML, but wasn't very impressed by what MS Project produced.
It's also got email/web messaging to ask people for updates, which I
suggest you completely ignore. You're probably best off printing it out, to
be honest.

tony: I'll do some experimentation anyway, once I've got something that's a
bit more like a believable plan.




AGENDA FOR WEEKLY MEETING

tony: What should we do every week? Suggestion: Becuase predominantly about
development work:
  - current state of the plan
  - issues about the plan. I'll attempt to record them and update the plan
as appropriate
  - any other development issues
  - product related issues, e.g. preparation for release dates, rollout of MPS.
  - news and AOB.

pekka: I think it's artificial and we're just going to end up talking about
everything anyway, but it's good to have a checklist. I think there will be
a lot of stuff that isn't represented in the plan, at least to start with.

daveb: I'd be tempted to put news first.
tony: Let's do that then.

pekka: Perhaps a item for New Requirements. Clients express themselves with
vague hopes, requests and queries. We need to be more specific about what
the actual req's are that we are working for. It's typically a prouct
issue, because with _real_ clients and products the product manager would
be the one who was doing that kind of negotiation.

daveb: I think new requirements is a sensible idea for a new item.

daveb: What about QA?
tony: could have a seperate item for qa
rit: I might want to talk about how QA was going for recent releases, raise
QA-related requirements/issues, discuss scheduling of pre-releases or
development releases intended only for QA.

pekka: E.g. a prerelease of brisling could be made pretty soon (test CBS
changes &c in ScriptWorks).
tony: Would a test of current trunk be sensible?
pekka: Yes, gavin said the procedure could be to do the release on the
trunk. Would give QA a fixed point to work from.
rit: Sounds ok to me. I'd suggest to begin with do a limited test just on a
PC, then when you've made more changes or decided not to, do a bigger test
(e.g. all of QATESTS). For the cbs/splay/mvff stuff, it shouldn't be very
platform-dependent.

daveb: Work practices and process. Could be a separate agenda item.

tony: Yup. THe first task for drj on the plan is to do a review of our
existing process.

drj: ... that's what I've been working on for the past week.


WHAT HAVE PEOPLE BEEN DOING

tony: Gavin was in last week, did lots of work on speeding up the CBS code
(performance bottleneck). That's led to other members doing approvals and
sorting out the rest of that work.
Plus planinng activities in general.

drj: Last week getting up to speed on the process stuff, taking it over
from Gavin with the aim of doing a review of the process: what state it's
in, where we want it to go. More reviews of code, design etc. Also getting
this Mac (McCaque) working, which now it seems to be.

pekka: Been mostly working on the web release. Gavin helped a lot with that
and wrote some documentation which is almost adequate. It was supposed to
be 2 days away from release when Gavin got fired, but I found it was a
larger job than I thought. I've sorted it out and there's now a beta
version that I hope someone will look at and spot if there's any problems.
Got to spend some time in the future to look at what goes in the next
release but that's not particularly urgent. Then I'll be looking at some of
the EPcore stuff (and asking Gavin for clarifications). I haven't got very
far in that but I'll have more time this week. In particular I'm still
waiting for information from EP, drj, tony about technical issues of
improving the manual pools etc (we talked about splay trees already). And
we need decisions about the direction of work we're going to take, because
EP are going to come up with new requirements, and have already done so for
the colour pool. We need to decide what the technical solution for that is
going to be.

[Nobody asked what rit had been doing, which is just as well as I can't
type and talk at the same time. For the record I have been looking at splay
tree changes with gavin, doing some comparative testing of anchovy.3 and
trapping.beta.6 (using SW 4.5), and trying to close some old changes that
are still in QA. I've just begun work on an analysis of test coverage of
the MPS. --rit]

daveb: Where should we be concentating time next...

tony: While we don't have a realistic plan, we have at least got a high
priority task assigned for each person, as follows:
  tony  -- prototype of new strategy for Dylan. Thinking about
           train algorithm etc.
  pekka -- metering code to get statistics from collector about
           what happens and when.
  drj   -- review of the process. Would be much more useful now than
           after we've settled into a new pattern of work.

daveb: I have some concerns over the way MM was managed in the past. For
ages, RichardB wanted to produce a product, but effort went into the web
pages and book instead. I think that was the wrong way round.
I think it's good we've got a documented process, provided it doesn't take
up more time than it saves. All the evidence suggests code reviews save
time. At least it's in better shape than an awful lot of harlequin.

tony: drj is assessing where the the process has been useful to us, rather
than cleaning up all the process docs.


OTHER STUFF

tony: I think it is important to talk to each of Dylan and EP shortly, to
find new requirements &c.

daveb: How do we balance reqs of Dylan, EPcore, Java? Probably have to do
at the Quartet level.

tony: Yes.
pekka: Utimately yes. I'd like to underline once more the fact that the
central idea of what we're doing it to have a framework that helps us
support both our existing clients and hypothetical future ones. So we need
to be able to do stuff that doesn't have a direct payoff in tthe next
client release.

daveb: So we should add some items about framework and process.

db: Heap visualisation stuff. How's that going?
tony: I'm currently waiting for stuff from Jonathan. I need to agree
timescales with him, but it's not necessarily something that I think is
higher priority than everything else. It's important because it's on the
Dylan path, but so are plenty of other things.

db: Locus manager?
pekka: Important for all our clients. EP especially are keen to try out new
pools, which increases the possibility of pathological behaviour if
segments are interleaved in a dumb way.

EP timeable is SW5.1 in January. We can deliever EP improvements in MVFF
and some other bug fixes by then. The segment placement thing is the large
thing that we really should do.

db: Do we have any releases promised to anyone at the moment?
tony: No.

db: drj, you were looking at Java stuff?
drj: Yes, I looked at Kaffe, and just managed to get it working. It's "free
software" so I had to get it to compile and run and run some Java program
-- that was a challenge in itself. My initial look on that was that the GC
implementation is in exactly two files so it shouldn't be very much work to
find out how it works and see how hard it would be to use the MPS. I've
also looked at the license for the Sun JVM -- at some point we need to
decide whether we want to license the source code. It's generally available
and free, but you have to sign an agreement with Sun to get it. I'm not a
lawyer, but it says you can hack around and do stuff with it, but can't
make a product based on it. I imagine the chief difficultly would be
getting it past our lawyers. Of course it's impossible for me to say what
Hqn has in the way of plans for a JVM.

Then we decided the process review was more important, so I have stopped
looking at the Java stuff for the time being.


pekka: ISSMM trip report. Should be a report to get the benefit of the trip
(even though we can't show how it helps the next client release). If we
delay we'll forget. Perhaps with should just put that on the plan.
tony: I know ptw has written a basic outline of a report which is a pretty
good start. I took notes for most of the papers, so I think we could get it
done quite quickly.
daveb: Notes on papers good. We don't want lots of text that nobody ever reads.

pekka: Risk management. There's bound to be stuff that isn't represented in
the plan. Part of it is overhead, but it strikes me that we tried to put
important stuff on the plan, and there's a lot of unimportant stuff,
represented in Darwin. Lots of it is in the early stages of defining. I
don't like to think of how many surprises & unresolved technical problems
there might be there. There are lots of requests, but I think we should
make a concerted effort to deal with them.

tony: I think we should get the plan into shape, then, as we're tracking
the plan, we should always be looking for things that should be scheduled
and added to it.

daveb: I found when using Darwin with ML group a lot of requests ended up
in defining. Could use the rating to determine which ones need to be looked
at.

pekka, daveb: It sounds like a process issue. drj could look at it as well.

pekka: Darwin doesn't show where the effort is going, because lots of it
goes into defining. So if defining can go into the plan, then that and
Darwin together might give us a better idea.

daveb: So the initial task for the requests in defining is really to go
through and _rate_ or _rank_ them. Maybe a second stage is getting a rough
idea of how long it would take.

daveb: What do you use at the moment? 1 to 5?

drj: Nope. Nothing at all. That's why we have such difficultly.

daveb: Dearie me. I recommend you use ratings, even if they're only simple.
It's not too important what the system is as long as there is one.

tony: If we do maintain ranks for requests, then they can become part of
the input to our scheduling process. We'd need to keep track of and review
them.

pekka: How many tasks can MS project cope with in the plan?

daveb: We used to have about 300 with 20 people. But we didn't use
dependencies much.

tony: We already have about 80 for only 3 people! I don't imagine we would
want to have anything more complicated than what the Dylan group had. I
expect that although we might have tasks which extend some way into the
future, the plan will only be believable for a month or two.

daveb: I'm visiting around 10:30 tomorrow until 2:30 ish on Friday. I want
to arrange appraisals this week.


ACTIONS

- tony to schedule time for defining requests as part of the plan,
- drj to look as process for rating,
- daveb to send drj info on Dylan ratings,
- daveb to raise with quartet the priorities of Dylan, EP, JAVA priorities,
- drj to send daveb information on sun license,
- daveb to do appraisals for drj, tony, pekka.


Meeting closed at about 12:30.

