                      GUIDELINES FOR REVIEW EDITS
                           guide.review.edit
                              draft guide
                           gavinm 1996-10-31

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document is for recording best practice of review edits.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone acting as Editor for reviews 
in the MM Group.


GENERAL

.log: The log should be placed in the edit section of the review document.  The 
review document for a document of tag <tag> and revision <revision> will be 
review.<tag>.<revision>.

.order: The log should be in numerical order, one issue per line.


EDIT COMMENTS

.edit-comments: The following describes the format of edit comments for each 
issue, indicating the action taken.  See  guide.review.class for issue 
classification.


Major Issues

.major: Major issues should receive one of the following responses:
  .major.reject: "Reject: <reason>"; reject the issue with a reason why it is 
not a valid issue.
  .major.comment: "Comment: <reason>"; it is a valid issue, but merely add a 
comment to the document, the reason states why it cannot be fixed at this 
time.  Note that this is not the same as fixing a defect in a comment.
  .major.fix: "Fix: <detail>"; fix the defect and give some indication of how.
  .major.raise: "Raise: <tag>"; escalate the defect, usually by creating a 
request in MM Evolution.

.major.other: If a major defect results in a change to another document, that 
document's tag must be quoted.


Minor Issues

.minor: Minor issues should receive one of the following responses:
  .minor.reject: "Reject: <reason>"; reject is issue with a reason why it is 
not a valid issue.
  .minor.forget: "Forget: <reason>"; it is a valid issue but is not worth 
taking any action over.  [Should we have this?]
  .minor.comment: "Comment: <reason>"; it is a valid issue, but merely add a 
comment to the document, the reason states why it cannot be fixed at this 
time.  Note that this is not the same as fixing a defect in a comment.
  .minor.fix: "Fix: <detail>"; fix the defect and give an indication of how; 
the detail is optional where the fix is obvious.
  .minor.raise: "Raise: <tag>"; escalate the defect, usually by creating a 
request in MM Evolution.

.minor.other: If a minor defect results in a change to another document, that 
document's tag must be quoted.


Comments

.comment: Comments on the product document should receive one of the following 
responses:
  .comment.reject: "Reject: <reason>"; reject the comment with a reason why it 
is invalid.
  .comment.forget: "Forget: <reason>"; it is a valid comment, but isn't worth 
taking any action over.  The reason is optional.
  .comment.comment: "Comment: <detail>"; a comment has been added to the 
document.  The detail is optional.
  .comment.fix: "Fix: <detail>"; the comment has resulted in a change to the 
product document.

.comment.other: If a comment results in a change to another document, that 
document's tag must be quoted.


Questions To The Author

.question: Questions to the author should receive one of the following 
responses:
  .question.mail: "Mail: <tag>.."; the question is answered in the specified 
mail message(s).
  .question.raise: "Raise: <tag>"; the question has been escalated to the 
specified document, usually a request in MM Evolution.


Improvement Suggestions:

.improve: Improvement suggestions should receive one of the following responses:
  .improve.edit: "Edit: <tag> <detail>"; edit of another document.  The detail 
is optional if it is obvious.
  .improve.pass: "Pass: <person>"; passed to another person, who has accepted 
it.
  .improve.raise: "Raise: <tag>"; elevated, usually to a request in MM 
Evolution.
  .improve.reject: "Reject: <reason>"; rejected because it is not a valid issue.
  .improve.forget: "Forget: <reason>"; it is a valid issue, but is not worth 
taking any action over. [Should we have this?]


CALCULATIONS

.manpower-used: The manpower used is the time for entry, kickoff, checking, 
logging, brainstorm, edit, and exit.  Kickoff, checking, logging and brainstorm 
must be multiplies by the number of checkers.  Entry and kickoff may be 
assigned to another document reviewed at the same time.

.manpower-saved: The default calculation is the number of major defects found 
and fixed, multiplies by 10 man-hours.  This represent the cost of a major 
defect found by QC.  If the defect would have reached customers, the estimate 
should be 100 man-hours.  A better estimate can be made, with justification.

.defects-remaining: The calculation of defects remaining should use the 
estimate <major defects found>/<number of pages>.  The obvious adjustment must 
be made for sampling.  The number of unresolved major issues (raised) should be 
added.  [In an ideal world, I believe we should know what proportion of major 
defects we find, and use that.  Perhaps we could use 75%? - GavinM]

