                   DOCUMENTATION DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
                    meeting.doc.1997-03-07.doc-proc
                             incomplete doc
                             lmb 1997-04-11

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby, Gavin Matthews, and Leah Bateman met at 
27 Portugal Place on 1997-03-07 to discuss the documentation 
development process, reference documentation, and indexing.


THE DOCUMENTATION DEVELOPMENT PROCESS

.process.dev: Richard talked a bit about his email (mail.richard.?)
regarding the development process.  .process.purpose: The point of
having a process is that you can learn from doing and can measure how
long each stage takes.  If you record when and where you find errors,
you can take steps to avoid similar errors in future.

.audit-trail: For these reasons, we need an audit trail between the
product software and the documentation.  .design-doc: However, we will
probably need less design documentation for the documentation.
.design-doc.type: One example of the type of design documentation we
may need is goals, justification, and requirements for each chapter.


REFERENCE DOCUMENTATION

.doc.ref.good: We then discussed the points of good and bad reference
documentation.  .doc.ref.workflow: Reference documentation needs to
cover document[?] workflow (use of protocols); in general, reference
documentation is good for finding out details of the commands,
symbols, etc., but not for learning how to use them.

.doc.modes-of-use: The MM product will have several modes of use,
and we should perhaps have a chapter for each mode, with several
extended examples.  .doc.examples: Creating the examples will be a
good exercise of the product interface, as well.  As far as examples
go, we might want two pages per level, plus several extended examples
in the back of the manual.


INDEXING

.complaint.examples:, .complaint.index: Leah pointed out that the two
points users most often complain about are lack of examples and poor
indexing.  .index.process: We need a process for indexing that
includes reviews and usability tests.  .index.ev-dev: Gavin mentioned
that he had once created an index, and that it underwent evolutionary
development as users came to him with problems.  .index.problems: He
cited the major problems he came across as lack of completeness, lack
of synonyms, components (?), too much brevity, poor ease of use, and
non-existent features.


TROUBLE-SHOOTING

.doc.t-s: Richard said that we will need a trouble-shooting section in
the manual, perhaps split by levels of use.  .doc.t-s.assertion: He
explained that assertions have unique IDs, and should have
documentation explaining what the assertion means and where in the
documentation to look for further information.  .doc.t-s.web: We will
probably put this section of the documentation on the Web, along with
addenda and errata for the full documentation set.
.doc.t-s.support-group: The SP Support Group will also need this
information.


VERSION NUMBERS FOR DOCUMENTATION

.version-num: Because Darwin contains slots for documentation version
numbers, we will need to have, on the documentation, version numbers
for both the software and the documentation.  .version-num.convention:
Leah explained that the Doc Group usually uses the software version
number as the documentation version number, with the addition of "Nth
Edition" if the documentation is released again before the software.
This information appears on the title page of each manual, and a
unique part number appears on the copyright page.


KNOCK-ON CHANGES TO DOCUMENTATION

.changes.doc-effect: We will need to assess how interface and protocol
changes will affect the documentation.


DOCUMENTATION IN DARWIN

.darwin.struct: Richard feels that, in Darwin, the documentation
should be a part of the product ("software is documentation with a
program that implements it").


ACTIONS

.act.index: Leah will investigate a process for the index.

.act.thesaurus: Leah will ask Ken to buy a thesaurus to aid with
finding synonyms for the index.

.act.Darwin: Leah will explore Darwin and make a report of (a) how she
feels the documentation should be dealt with within Darwin and (b) any
problems that may occur as a result of dealing with the documentation
in that manner.


