             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-01-26
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-02-02

Start 1999-01-26, 11:30 GMT

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>.


NEWS

tony: main news is that release of brisling.1 to epcore is imminent.


BRISLING

tony: We're waiting the nod from QA. Signs at the moment are that it's
looking ok. Performance results are encouraging.

rit: brisling.1 status:- hysteresis seems to give a performance improvement 
of around 5% with a hysteresis fund of 256Kb. With no hysteresis fund, 
performance is slower than anchovy.

tony: Proviso: speed tests currently only been performed on Windows.

daveb: What's the basic idea of hysteresis again?

tony: When a page has become free, instead of the arena giving it back to
the O/S, we keep it, and if it's needed again, we can reuse it straight
away. Avoids unmapping and remapping pages.

daveb: Just for VM arena? Are they using the VM arena a lot?

tony: Yes, everywhere apart from on the Mac ..

rit: ... and on SMP rips.


rit: I'm happy for it to go to SW now. We can get more definite performance
figures after that. As long as they don't give it to customers tomorrow!

tony,drj: Plan is release of SW at end of February.

rit: brisling.1 was made to fix the bugs in original brisling - notably
the hysteresis fund leading to allocation failures in low memory situations,
and a problem with buffers in MVFF.



FUTURE RELEASES

tony: Java next?

daveb: Yes, Java's more important.

tony: So perhaps this is where we should talk about the plan. Unfortunately
I haven't got a newer version that I can show you now, because I'm fighting
MS Project. But I can tell you something about what I've done with the
plan, and I hope I can release it imminently.

tony: I've been getting the history more correct for what we've done on
brisling, and ensuring the Java work is represented more correctly. Also to
make sure we keep making progress on key work: locus manager, segments, gc
strategy, quality and documentation. I've put in a task for the segregated
allocation cache that turned up while we were working on brisling. I can't
give a date right now because MS Project won't do the levelling.

drj: Dave, have you heard from Sharon recently?

daveb: Not since Friday, no.

drj: Status of Java: it looks like Sharon is about to sign the license, and
it should take about a week after that before we can get Java.

tony: So in terms of the timings we talked about last week, that doesn't
hold things up.

tony: We should be within a month or two of getting a Java release out.

pekka: I guess if we discuss the new plan next week that should be soon enough.

tony: Yes. If anything looks particularly worrying, we can begin by
discussing it on email.


STACK SCANNING PROPOSALS

daveb: Anyone have any comments about Andy Sizer's stack-scanning proposal?

pekka: Lots of technical comments, yes. I'm a bit surprised he's putting so
much effort into it from outside the group. We wouldn't have time to do
much on it. He's doing quite well, especially considering he's starting
knowning less about the MPS.

tony: This all came up in an unplanned way.

daveb: I'm not expecting you to immediately go away and implement it.

tony: Actually, the amount of MPS work is probably relatively small. The
main work is for language implementors, which I think is why Andy's been
looking at it.

pekka: It would be nice if Andy would write the Dylan side of it!

tony: Also worth noting there are a number of issues relating to the
back-end of the Dylan compiler and to the Dylan run-time system. It may
make sense for Nosa to talk to Andy and/or us when it comes to that work.

daveb: Andy's work in the languages work in general is to be a chief
designer. This work could be useful for porting LISP or even ML as well as
helping Dylan. When all this actually happens depends on what priorities we
come up with.

daveb: I'm glad you seem to be fairly happy with what he's done. I haven't
read all the mail yet.

pekka: It's very involved, and hard to dicuss until you have quite detailed
proposals. I think we're about to have another detailed proposal, which
will help.


REAL TIME JAVA

tony: John Hotchkiss reminded daveb and me recently that there's a lot of
discussion going on about what a real-time Java would look like. Could have
implications for what the MPS might need to provide in the future. There's
a mailing list associated with these discusssions -- I'll mail out a URL to
the MMers. I wonder if it would be a good idea to subscribe so it gets
archived internally somewhere.

daveb: Yes, put in a request for a mail alias.

tony: I imagine we should do it like info-dylan: it gets archived, and
individuals can subscribe if they wish to. But we shouldn't force it on
mm-hackers or anyone else. Our interest is predominantly GC, but there
could be others in the company with an interest in real time Java.

daveb: maybe we need new java-realtime list?

rit: How to archive? Spring, news?

tony: Spring better, for the searching tools.

tony,drj: Put us on it initially.


PORTING

daveb: The other thing John forwarded us was about . Enquiry about porting
Eclipse to VXworks, suggestion that Harlequin might already have LispWorks
for VXWorks. We have a solution (RCLE) and if we can make it available,
that may be everything that they need. Failing that, we could provide a MM
unit?

tony: The important question would be what their real time requirements were?

daveb: What real time requirements can we satisfy?

tony: Soft ones.

daveb: I'll find out more from John.


pekka: Do we have any idea of the timetable of the possible port of
LispWorks to 64 bit alpha?

daveb: No, I'm afraid. It comes down to where Andy Sizer might spend his times.

daveb: Would it be most sensible to port LW to 32-bit MPS first, or port
MPS to 64-bit first and then use LW with that?

drj,pekka: Actually, MPS already works on 64-bit, but it's not used much so
we don't really know what problems there might be.

daveb: Well, no need to do anything about it yet.


drj: Solaris and Linux Dylan port?

daveb: There's still some work focused on Linux, but it's in the
background. I don't think we need to port yet. There's some pressure for
the Solaris port, but we'd need a code-generator for that. Jonathan wants
Andy to sketch out the Solaris back-end initially. It may take a bit of
time.



daveb: Congratulations on brisling!



