             NOTES FROM THE MM QUARTET MEETING, 1997-06-09
                       meeting.quartet.1997-06-09
                             incomplete doc
                           richard 1997-05-27

PROPOSED AGENDA ITEMS

[Quartet members, add your items for the agenda here.  richard 1997-05-27]

Ken Jackson is invited! x2422 - nick 1997-06-06

What steps are being taken to investigate possible OEM deals?  What plans does 
Chris have to investigate Java opportunities?  richard 1997-05-28

overview.ideas is out of date - does this matter?  nick 1997-05-29

Tucker and Andrew want to discuss the product with Addison-Wesley, and claim 
that this is necessary to maintain a good relationship with them.  Why are we 
so coy?  richard 1997-06-30

mlworks 2.0m0 has slipped to june 13, so tikka can slip & meet its requirements 
& still not be a problem nick. 1997-05-30

status reports - where are we on the various products? nick 1997-06-03

priorities: external Product vs internal commitments. Eg richard & nick could 
hold Product planning meetings twice weekly, but this would impact EP / dylan. 
nick 1997-06-03 

What level of support are we intending?  How much will we spend supporting each 
customer?  This affects requirements on levels of support backtrace, etc., and 
therefore implementation effort.  richard 1997-06-04

How often can we ship stuff which is incompatible (binary, source, or protocol) 
with previous shipped version?  Once a year?  Every few months?  As the product 
matures customers will tolerate less change.  What is the policy?  We need to 
know in order to judge what changes can be made.  richard 1997-06-04


INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Nick Levine <nick>, Chris Cox <chrisc>, and 
Mark Preece <mwp> met to discuss MM project issues.  Ken Jackson <kenj> was 
invited to discuss documentation resourcing.


DOCUMENTATION


Product Documentation

.doc.position: Leah has been temporarily withdrawn from MM Product 
documentation to work on emergency Watson documentation.  There will be a 
release at the end of August, after which Leah will return to work on MM.  Leah 
is enthusiastic about MM.  There will be a corresponding four month delay in 
the product documentation schedule.

.doc.conflict: Ken stated that there is no other obvious conflict for Leah at 
the moment.  [No guarantees were given, however.  richard 1997-06-10]

.doc.consult: Richard asked why the Quartet were not consulted earlier.  Not 
even the HiNTs product manager was aware what happened.  Ken responded that the 
need for resources came suddenly.

.doc.procedure: The management model for the future is that such conflicts must 
be worked out between Quartets, with escalation to the board.  In this case, Jo 
Marks is PMM for HiNTs, so we consider that has already been so escalated.


Contact with Addison-Wesley

.book.background: Following meeting.book.1997-05-27, several people asked why 
we could not be more open with Peter Gordon, the commissioning editor at 
Addison-Wesley.  (The messages mail.skeene.1997-06-04.18-48, 
mail.skeene.1997-06-05.18-28 summarize the position nicely.)

.book.reveal: Chris Cox stated that we could reveal to Peter Gordon that:

  - We are working on a related product.
  - It will be in some sort of object-oriented field -- not ruling out any OO 
language.
  - Could be for Java or C.

.book.caveat: Chris also stated that surprise is essential for this market, and 
that any leak would be damaging.  The situation with MM is more sensetive than 
with ML, because the MM market is developing.

.book.relevance: Chris questioned the relevance of the book to the product.  
Richard responded that the book made up a substantial part of documentation for 
the product, that no such book existed yet, and so we'd have to write most of 
it anyway as product documentation.


QA

There were no QA issues.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS

[Notes not yet complete.  richard 1997-06-10]


