             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-05-18
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-05-21

Start 11:46.

Present: David Jones <drj>, Pekka Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>,
Tony Mann <tony>.

(Dave Berry was on holiday. Andy Sizer wasn't around.)


NEWS

tony: Daveb's on holiday. I think he's back on 25th.

tony: The quartet have expressed an interest in real-time and Java. So we
had a meeting (with Andys and Martin) last Thursday, and we have another
one this Thursday.

tony: The quartet have raised the priority of the Java work.

rit: I've heard that Eric Penfold is leaving at the end of this week. Not
confirmed.


RELEASES


* web

tony: release.web.diadem is not yet on the web server. We guess it's
imminent. release.web.garden is scheduled for the end of July.


* java

tony: Small amount of progress on release.java.amaretto, but mostly drj's
been working on the arena hysteresis bug.

tony: We've adjusted the plan a bit, and have a date of 4th June for
releasing it out of QA. drj, is that realistic?

drj: Hmm, maybe not. I'll talk to you afterwards about that.


* dylan

tony: Nothing much has happened. Remind myself to contact Dylan group about
the stack scanning issues. Ask them if they'd like a patch release for
jackdaw.

pekka: What do we know about Dylan's schedule? Who's planning that, if Dave
Berry isn't? He asked them about their timetable for a linux port, but we
haven't had a response.

tony: Yes. Also he quoted a date out of our schedule; we might do better to
provide a more conservative estimate.


* epcore

rit: Mike Cox tells me that SW 5.2 is going into QA, and has about 7 seven
weeks of QA scheduled for it. So they will be extremely reluctant to accept
MM changes during that time.

tony: We believe the arena hysteresis bug can't show up in EP core, because
of the way they (currently) use the arena.

pekka: Yes, it's all explained in the request. EP don't know anything about
it yet, but they will.


PLAN

tony: New version. I've changed the views slightly, to sort them by finish
order rather than start order. Makes it less cluttered.

tony: I increased the priority of the Java work, and looked into
reassigning some of the tasks to get it done sooner. But the bulk of it is
in a few serially-dependent tasks: resolve/preserve, tracer and format
interface updates, implementation of Java weakness. I'm currently assigned
resolve/preserve, and the others are assigned to David. The current date
scheduled for the JVM release is the 3rd August, which at least is within
13 weeks!

pekka: There seems to be a week between the end of development effort and
the release milestone.

tony: Hmm, that's odd. Is it just the weekend? Ah no, it's the QA effort.

pekka: Backwards dependency on task 72: rank semantics and the format?

tony: Yes, it's been represented in the plan as having a finish-start
dependency, but drj's already done a little bit of preparatory work on it.

pekka: Some of the replayer work that I've already done is scheduled in the
future. How does it let you even do that?

tony: Oops. Because the levelling can only delay tasks, not make them
happen sooner. So if you do more work in a week than the schedule expected,
it puts it in the future.

pekka: The plan shows the visualisation tools before Java...

tony: Yes, they're done in parallel with some of the Java work. The Java
work can't be parallelised any more. Well, it might be possible to make
some of the work happen more in parallel, but it would increase the total
amount of work.

pekka: Planning for release.web.garden. There are various bits of work we
need to assign to people. What would people like to do?

rit: I'd be happy to do "collection cycle" and "generation". I'll have
another look and think about the others.

pekka: I'd like to get them all assigned today.

rit: I think there might be a dependency missing on task
harness.new-format. I'll talk to you afterwards.


WORK PRACTICES

tony: We're still expecting a review schedule.

drj: Yes. I try to get it for the next meeting. No, I _will_ get it for the
next meeting.

tony: I'm away for the next two weeks. I'll try to update the plan before I
go on Friday. If you could get the review schedule to me by then, I'll put
it on the page.

Finish 12:11



