                        GROUP PERFORMANCE REVIEW
                       meeting.general.1996-07-09
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1996-07-11

[This is quite rough: Attribution is inconsistent and my tenses are up the 
spout.  I'll leave it as is (except for factual corrections) unless anybody 
wants a more polished product. -- GavinM]

.purpose: Richard has held individual performance reviews with evey member of 
the group in parallel with the Company Salary Review procedure.  This meeting 
was held to discuss common themes from the individual reviews and the 
performance of the group over the last year.

.present: Richard, DRJ, NickB, GavinM.  Tucker was busy dealing with an urgent 
piece of external work.

.personal: Richard explained that he had considered making his notes from 
personal reviews publically available, but that he had abandoned this after 
further personal discussion.  Instead he'll send a copy to each individual.  He 
plans to review them in three months time (October).

.plan-for-year: Richard has planned to be at the "tuning and tools" stage by 
now (from last year).  Actually, the technology is nearly complete and no more 
research is required.  Now we need to produce defect-free code towards a 
product.

.slip: Why are we 3 to 6 months behind on schedule in the year?  Richard isn't 
too happy about this.  There are two possibilities:

.slip.optimism: Richard is 100% over-optimistic when planning.

.slip.visibility: The plan is not continuously visible.

.richards-job: Richard's job is to make sure a plan happens.

.ignorance: NickB said he was unware of any sub-goals failing to be met at the 
right time.  He though that we haven't really been doing any unnecessary work, 
but that we have been doing lower priority work.

.experiment: NickB said that the last two years have been a big experiment in 
term of software process.  He thought we weren't always aware of things being 
directed towards good software process, but that we were close to having an 
effective software process.  In future we ahould have less experimentation and 
more planning.  He recommended "Managing the Software Process" by Watts 
Humphreys which says you should know your process and have a mechanism for 
improving it.

.buy-in: Richard commented that we had total buy-in within the group to 
process; everyone was interested.  Now is the time to solidify.

.gestalt: DRJ suggested that our software process was more group consciousness 
than realised.  

.diversification: DRJ also suggested that diversification has been good; we 
shouldn't just be doing Dylan.  Richard replied that we were in danger of 
taking on too much.  GavinM asked whether being able to predict the slippage 
would have given any benefit.  Richard replied that it wouldn't have affected 
decisions.  GavinM pointed out that time constraints will become more common in 
future.

.valuable: Richard reported on some of the things which Tucker (absent) had 
said.  Travel and review were the most valuable things we did.  He felt he was 
getting less involved, being at an isolated site.

.forward: Richard said that, looking forward, we would be doing the following 
in the next year:

.forward.product: We would product a shrink-wrap product or seal the Sun OEM 
deal, or both.

.forward.dylan: Dylan would ship. 

.forward.epcore: SW would ship with an MPS GC.

.forward.ml: MLWorks would ship with an MM-supported GC.

.team: The current team make up is:
    2.5 core developers (DRJ, NickB, Richard)
    1 process (GavinM)
    0.5 managers (Richard)
    1 tools person (Tucker)

.aim: Richard outlined some of his aims for the coming year:

.aim.relationship: To simplify relationships with other groups.

.aim.delegate: To delegate things more.

.aim.help: To get helped by GavinM.

.requirements: We need to have stronger and simpler identification of 
requirements.  We discussed NickB's Requirements Satisfaction Chart; it helps 
identify areas of concern so that we can derive solutions from unmet 
requirements and feed this into the plan.

.platforms: Richard mentioned that he only had some vague ideas about what sort 
of platforms the members of the group should be using for development.  He said 
he needed more justification for this and a documented plan.

.recap: The main points to come out were:
    - Our lack of planning (or visible planning)
    - Experimentation with software process
    - Taking on new staff
    - Having a more stable process

.perceptions: Richard discussed the perceptions of the MM Group within 
Harlequin.  People seem to react well to Richard's ideas, either because 
they're good ideas or because of Richard's personal charisma.  Several groups 
are starting to imitate MM tehcniques.  There is some scepticism that we waste 
too much time on secondary development.  People were keen on our 
meta-documents, as they enable accuracy and buy-in for goals and requirements.

.process-product: Richard discussed whether we should be marketting process as 
a product.  It was agreed that we should try to involve HIS in a joint effort.

.brainstorm: The group then had a brief whiteboard brainstorm which produced 
the following:

.brainstorm.to-do: To do:
    - Planning procedure/cycle
    - Process improvement: get to level 2 (see .experiment)
    - Work smarter
    - More travel
    - More review

.brainstorm.process-product: Process product:
    - Tags
    - Infosys
    - Code Review
    - Review
    - Analysis

.brainstorm.missing-link: We need to have something between goal.general and 
goal.dylan.  We need a req.general and/or an analysis.programme.

.brainstorm.infosys: The infosys in not an accurate representation of the "true 
information".  Some information doesn't exist.  We should have place-holder 
documents to indicate that the information needs to be generated.  Perhaps we 
should have an extra document status to prevent people from inferring that the 
information exists.  Perhaps these place-holders could contain a time-estimate 
for the creation of the true document; this could feed into planning.


