             NOTES FROM THE MM/PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-11-01
                       meeting.product.1996-11-01
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-11-01

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Clive Harris <cliveh>, Mark Preece <mwp>, 
and Jo Blishen <jblishen> met to discuss Memory Management product progress.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Jo: I'm working on goals and requirements documents for the product.  Getting 
to grips with the MM Information System.  That's about it.

Richard: I've asked for a Darwin (Product Evolution) database which may happen 
next week.  Then we can start tinkering with it and working out how to use it.

Jo: [Re meeting.product.1996-10-18.act.ui] The web group are using CLIM, so 
there's nothing interesting in that for this group.


MARKETING


Competetive Product Analysis

Clive: Pending arrival of competetive products.  They are on the way.


Answering Anti-GC Articles

Clive: Tucker has posted some stuff quoting the article about Java GC.  I'll 
find Tucker's posting (.act.posting).



Web Pages

Richard: I expect we'll have a new draft by the end of next week.

Clive: We have a new hire, Randall Lamb, who is working with Craig.  Could we 
use him to develop something for MM marketing which will describe the benefits 
of using our MM solution.  We could well apply it to this.

Richard: We could use some animations for documentation.  There are lots of 
visual aspects to the project.

Clive: I will approach him (.act.lamb).


DEVELOPMENT

Clive: Is stuff still being added to the core system?

Richard: Yes, lots of stuff.  I am working on improving the GC.  There are also 
things to do for both Dylan and EP.  When they start using the system more 
there will no doubt be more work.  I hope to have reports which will help you 
to see what's going on (see below).


Status and Progress Reporting

Richard: I'm setting up a reporting process which will transport to Darwin and 
benefit this group.  We should have the first cut of a report next week.


Tools Developer

All: We don't seem to have made progress.

Clive: I mentioned the need to Glenn Bach at the Communcations meeting last 
week at 1CC.

Jo: What about using Dylan and DUIM?

Clive: If there's no movement by Christmas we should reconsider using DUIM.  It 
might be ready enough.


Toy System

Richard: [Re meeting.product.1996-10-18.act.proto] Sorry I haven't done this.

Clive: Something by the end of the month would be good.


QA

Mark: Met Richard Tucker.  Created a database shared between the QA Group.  
Document database.  It's in PROJECTS/QA on Notes servers.


DOCUMENTATION

Richard: Leah is looking at web pages in order to (a) proof them and (b) learn 
about memory management.  She should also be starting on MM/Product 
documentation.  I will organize this with her.


PROCESS

Richard: Trying to encourage functional groups (e.g. PMs) to store best 
practice centrally in a database.


ACTIONS

.act.posting: Clive will locate Tucker's posting about Java VM GC.  [Actually, 
I could just ask Tucker about it -- richard]

.act.george: Richard will talk to George about MM tool developer recruitment.

.act.lamb: Clive will approach Randall Lamb with a view to developing graphic 
and possibly animated marketing material and documentation.

.act.toy: Richard will put together a toy package for Clive and Jo to play with 
by the end of this month.

.act.doc: Richard will organize the beginning of product documentation with 
Leah Bateman.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-11-15 15:30 UT

