                           MM QUARTET MEETING
                       meeting.quartet.1997-03-03
                               draft doc
                          jblishen 1997-03-03

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Attended by Richard <richard>, Jo <jblishen> and Mark <mwp>.  Clive at 
Object World East.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.riccardo: Jo will negotiate some of Riccardo Teffarelo's time from
Glenn Bach - she will keep trying.

.act.luke: Richard will talk to Luke about estimating GUI development effort.

.act.gill: Ditto Gill Peacegood.

.act.plan: Jo and Richard to produce an MM product plan.

.act.book.spec: Richard to make sure the plans that Tucker has end up in the 
spec.

.act.book.approval: Jo to write paragraph about book and send to senior 
management for their approval.

.act.dalton: Richard should speak to Jo Bragger and maybe George as well about 
Nick Dalton - will do again.

.act.rival: Clive will prod the order for rival products to see if he can move 
it again and report back at next meeting.


REPORTS ON ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.equipment.qa: Mark will report back about what other QA groups 
requirements are (EP).

Mike Cox keen on an UltraSparc.

.act.equipment.mm: Richard will speak to Khalid about reuse of old equipment 
and purchasing.

There's unlikely to be anything to reuse.  George says talk to Dave Walsh about 
upgrading PCs as the Dylan group is putting in requests for upgrading their 
machines.  This will put additional requirements on MM equipment.  Richard has 
set aside time on Thursday to fill in necessary forms.  George mentioned 
purchasing an Alpha when Jo spoke to him - Mark prefers an UltraSparc.  
(.act.equipment.richard Richard to speak to Dave Walsh about upgrading PCs and 
to fill in HIS forms for equipment purchases.)

.act.dylan.tests: Jo to ask Dylan group to ship Dylan to MM as is for 
performance tuning.

Tomy Mann says that there should be something stable enough for MM group by the 
end of March.


MINUTES

Documentation

The doc plan has been reviewed.  Defects in the plan discovered which are 
mainly problems with completeness.  MM group is working out sets of rules for 
doc plans by looking at this particular example so it's a very useful bit of 
review work.  Finish the gaps when Leah is visiting in Cambridge on Friday and 
next week.

MM/Dylan

Patch release has been given to Dylan to solve a problem that was stopping Tony 
working.  
Richard points out that Dylan have a C back end which uses free software and 
has a Boehm GC.  Will this be shipped with any product (WebPrinter?)?  What's 
the licensing position and is it technically a good idea?  The native back end 
has the MM collector.  Will there be a sudden requirement to integrate the MM 
collector into the C back end?   

.act.webprinter: Jo to speak to Neil about multi platform requirements on Dylan 
from WebPrinter and what are the web groups plans to ship the Dylan C Back end. 

MM/ML

No firm plans from ML group.  Dave Berry should be getting back to Richard this 
week.

MM/EpCore

No problems.  RIP looks 25% faster with new MM with musicians test.  These are
unreliable figures which need confirming.

MM Product

Jo hasn't had time to write the MM product description.  .act.overview: Richard 
to write the outline MM product description to provide an overview of the 
product.


NEXT MEETING

Wednesday 19 March at 10am/3pm.


ACTIONS

.act.equipment.richard: Richard to speak to Dave Walsh about upgrading PCs and 
to fill in HIS forms for equipment purchases.

.act.webprinter: Jo to speak to Neil about multi platform requirements on Dylan 
from WebPrinter and what are the web groups plans to ship the Dylan C Back end. 

.act.overview: Richard to write the outline MM product description to provide 
an overview of the product.



