      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-06-07
                       meeting.product.1996-06-07
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-06-07

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Alex Parnes, Clive Harris, Richard Brooksby, Mark Preece, and Ken 
Jackson met on 1996-06-07 to discuss resource requirements for the memory 
management product.


MISCELLANEOUS

.alex.vac: Alex is going on holiday for two weeks to Israel.


BUSINESS MODEL

Alex: We need to discuss the business model.  Both Alex and Clive discussed the 
product vision with Jo over last couple of weeks.  Clive had most intimate 
conversation on the issue.

Clive: Jo regards the shrink-wrap side as exciting and market leading.  He 
wants to go ahead.  He also acknowledges the resource limitations of 
development, and if certain commercial contractual opportunities come up then 
management decisions must be taken on whether we can do everything at once.

Alex: It is now up to product management (Quartet) to define business model and 
implementation.

[No action was recorded.  Who will draft this? -- richard]

Alex: Scalability is an issue.  Need to develop description of people and 
timing of hiring in order to meet targets.  Richard -- please develop.  When 
does the _next_ product materialize, and what do we do about it?

Richard: Need to solve the scalability problem before adding the next project.  
We can cope with current internal commitments, plus either Sun or shrink-wrap, 
but not both.

Alex: What about the risk to the shrink-wrap product of not developing for OEMs?

Richard: Any work we do in between now and shrink-wrap will mature the product 
and reduce risk, but the two aren't directly related.

Richard: I suggest we assume that we are going for shrink wrap unless Sun comes 
along, in which case we re-evaluate.

Alex: Agreed.  Two things need to be done: 1. size up effort, 2. functional 
specification.

Clive: We're moving towards a functional specification.

ACTION: Richard and Clive will finish by end of this month.  [Actually, by the 
next Quartet meeting on July 27th.  See below. -- richard]


DEVELOPMENT

ACTION: Richard must specify person to work on tools by end of next week.

Alex: There is resistance to hiring at 1CC at the moment.

Richard: 1CC is really much better because the person will work with Tucker on 
tool development.  Tucker will manage the person and provide the bridge between 
core system development and tools.  That is essential, otherwise the new person 
will need to gain core system knowlege which takes a long time.

Alex: Let's put the spec together then put that to glc, shimbo, toml, and 
jbragger, with indication that 1CC would be best, because of proximity to 
Tucker.  Include justification.

Richard: We will need internal documentation and procedures to scale up the 
development effort because of the intricacy of the system.  Gavin Matthews, who 
starts this month, will be working on this, but if that doesn't work we'll need 
to rethink.

Alex: Let's review Gavin's efforts in a month or so.

Clive: Must iterate tool development depending on what gets designed and what 
works best.

Richard: On the other hand we are time constrained.  Jo wants a product by the 
end of the fiscal year.

Alex: Other constraints?

Richard: I don't believe we can support both internal, shrink-wrap, and 
contract (Sun) work until we have solved the scalability issue.  That must be 
clear.  In fact, I will refuse to try something so infeasible.

Alex: Minute that clearly.  [See above -- richard]


QA

Mark: I met with Richard and we concluded that we need someone in Cambridge or 
2QC.

Alex: What about Menlo?

Mark: The person would need to be considerably more mature and know a lot more 
about MM.  If they're in the UK they don't need anywhere near as much knowledge.

Richard: We also agreed that they would be involved in SW, MLWorks, and Dylan 
QA, with special responsibility for testing memory management in those contexts.

Alex: Timing?

Mark: I need to interview in July when I'm in the UK, so that's pretty much 
immediate.

ACTION: Mark to add details (C/C++, location justification) to job outline and 
send to Alex, who will forward it to operational management and HR.

Alex: QA model issues?

Mark: SW+MM can't be tested early, but will go into 4.1 (September freeze, Jan 
release).  We've set up a mailing list for QA to coordinate.  Waiting for new 
person really.


DOC

[Alex fetched KenJ at this point.]

Alex: We want to talk about necessary documentation resources.  We're working 
on the assumption that we have internal customers, maybe external contractors 
requiring consulting, and a shrink-wrappable product which will require 
heavy-duty documenation.  You were asked to discuss this and size it.

Ken: Bob met Richard and looked at requirements and came up with estimates 
given product description that looked like, for external documentation for 
customers, that we have six person months of work.  Need to start very soon.  
Could be more if we have a new recruit.  Some of it depends on the tools that 
go out with MM.

Alex: Six person months starting immediately.  Where?

Ken: We're better of close to Richard.

Alex: What about temporary person as a solution?

Ken: Possible, but has disadvantages that we lose the expertise.  We expect 
this to be ongoing and have overlap, so it would be useful to hold on.  It's 
possible, though.

Alex: Let's work on assumption of permanence.  You specified that.  Let's pass 
that on to operational management.

Ken: The other thing is internal documentation and Richard wants that 
thoroughly covered.  Doc writes external documentation in general.  We have 
done little on internal stuff.  Sometimes external doc provides internal 
feedback.  We could have internal writers.  It seems that's better off in 
development, but there are organizations where writers do it.  We could change.

Alex: What is the spec for the external documentation?

[See meeting.doc.1996-06-04 or click this thingy --> ]

Ken: We've laid out a set for the documentation.  Pool class catalog, ref man, 
guide, quick-start (marketing trial), installation/rel-notes, on-line help.

Alex: Does doc need marketing input?

Clive: Looks fine, and is all important.

Richard: I designed it with input from Clive anyway.

Alex: OK, let's agree on that.

Ken: I'll be in UK in the next week or so.  Let's meet.


SUPPORT

Alex: Not really discussed yet.  As long as we're talking about internal stuff 
the support model is where the users are directly interacting with the MM Group.

Richard: OK.

Alex: For shrink-wrap model, we need to have dedicated resource for support, 
which is basically structured according to WebMaker model.  Dealing with 
shrink-wrapped product that will be supported by mail and mail only.  Not 
on-site intensive effort.  Here are the models:

  - webmaker: answering mail questions (dawson at menlo),
  - LISP for internal: directly between lisp group and internal customers,
  - EP: OEM hand-holding and intimate involvement: on-site (account managers) 
and support people (phone, 5 people).

Tricky part is phase 2 with Sun.  Could require OEM arrangement, as well as 
developers.  Phase 1, no extra effort.  Phase 3 (shrink-wrap) needs a support 
person (at menlo!).  Phase 2 depends on business, so defer.

Richard: What about encouraging business in consultancy and bespoke solutions?

Mark: Person will have to be highly skilled, and will be interactive.  Webmaker 
is answering pretty naive questions.  Doubt that this will be typical for MM.

Alex: We operate a similar model in Lisp.  Capacity might be there.  I intend 
to use the internal resources, unless I'm told that the skill set is wrong.

Richard: Customer will be skilled developer.

Alex: Sounds right.  These people have been doing that already.


Alex: Explorer is available for free redistribution.  So that's good unless 
Microsoft restricts it.

Alex: Full product definition by end of July.  Less time but still going OK.

Richard: Mostly getting job descriptions.

Alex: We need a master plan for the Quartet with highlights, with 
inter-departmental tasks put together.

Richard: Will geneate text time-line.  Tool it later.

Alex: next meeting, June 27th at 15:00 BST to review product definition.

