              TRANSCRIPT OF IRC CHANNEL #MM ON 1997-06-23
                           irc.mm.1997-06-23
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-24

.logbot.00-06-27: PART

.logbot.00-06-29: JOIN

.logbot.00-06-35: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.00-06-35.1: My mind is making ashtrays in Dayton....

.topic.00-06-35: TOPIC: Memory Damagement

.richard.06-48-14: JOIN

.logbot.06-48-17: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.06-48-17.1: All of life is a blur of Republicans and meat!

.richard.07-00-08: JOIN

.logbot.07-00-10: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.07-00-10.1: And furthermore, my bowling average is unimpeachable!!!

.drj.07-24-04: JOIN

.logbot.07-24-06: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.07-24-06.1: Yow!  Are you the self-frying president?

.gavinm.07-24-26: Hello.

.drj.07-24-33: hi

.gavinm.07-25-06: I caught the end of a news article on the radio this morning.

.drj.07-25-46: oh?

.gavinm.07-25-52: A woman was convicted of attempted murder (of her husband), 
but was given a suspended sentence because her attempt was incompetent.

.gavinm.07-26-27: What I wondered was, why are the consequences more important 
that the intent?

.gavinm.07-27-09: Similarly, you are very unlikely to be charged with dangerous 
or careless driving, unless you are judged to be the cause of an accident.

.drj.07-27-46: indeed, but in that case there is always driving without due 
care and attention.  mind you, they can be different things.

.drj.07-28-04: inded, quite a lot of peopoe who drive dangerous are probably 
paying quite a lot of attentin.

.drj.07-28-18: but it seems odd that the consequences shouldbe more important 
than the intent

.gavinm.07-29-04: It seems to me that, for the law to be fair (speaking 
hypothetically), it is the intent that is important.

.gavinm.07-29-23: If you attempt to murder someone, and accidentally kill 
someone else, it's still murder.

.drj.07-29-57: hmm.  I'm not sure I approve of the latter.

.drj.07-30-18: it depends on how I intend to murder my victim.

.gavinm.07-30-21: In America, if your co-conspirator is killed in the course of 
a crime, you're guilty of some class of unlawful killing.

.gavinm.07-30-56: That, again, is certainly true of America, and I believe here.

.richard.07-32-39: If I wave a gun around, should I be convicted of murder in 
case I might have killed someone?

.richard.07-33-01: How can the law determine my intentions?

.drj.07-33-10: er, are we to assume that you didn't discharge the weapon or 
otherwise harm anyone with the gun?

.gavinm.07-33-12: It's certainly unlawful killing.

.gavinm.07-33-25: .. if you do kill someone.

.richard.07-33-29: To put it another way, should I be punished for my 
intentions?

.drj.07-33-59: the question "how can the law determine my intentions" and 
"should I be punished for my intentions" are different questions.

.richard.07-34-08: By the same token.

.gavinm.07-34-18: Intent or consequences?  The law seems to be confused about 
which it wants to punish.

.drj.07-34-21: and in any case the purpose of law is not to punish

.richard.07-34-35: Punished/whatever it is you think it's for.

.drj.07-35-02: law usually considers the reasonable consequences of ones 
actions as well as ones intent.

.gavinm.07-35-15: Punishment/Protection of society/Rehabilitation/Deterrent are 
the usual four reasons given.

.drj.07-35-26: law can be determine ones intentions in the same way that it can 
prove an assertion.

.drj.07-35-43: ah, justice as opposed to law

.richard.07-35-53: By convincing a group of other people?

.gavinm.07-35-57: According to Gallup, two-thrids of "us" would be willing to 
queue for Wimbledon tickets, even if the queue were several miles long.

.drj.07-36-10: what crap

.richard.07-36-11: I don't know any thrids.

.drj.07-36-40: richard, that appears to be a common method in law of proving 
assertions, yes.  You wouldn't have anything more objective would you'/

.drj.07-36-54: digraph, '/ == ?

.drj.07-38-03: personally, I think waving a gun around shows sufficient intent 
to use it that it should be possible to prosecute such an action.

.drj.07-38-09: the same goes for ownership of a gun

.richard.07-38-13: I don't have a better method, no.  I'm concerned about 
"proving" that I intended something, rather than that I did something.  I'd 
have to study trials where intentions was proved to understand it better.

.gavinm.07-38-56: I'd agree that ownership of a gun shows intent to use, but 
for what purpose?

.richard.07-38-57: Waving a gun around could be an offence in itself -- 
threatening behaviour, or whatever.  That might be a good compromise.

.richard.07-39-13: Gavin: No.  I might have a gun fetish.

.gavinm.07-39-50: Richard, and that wouldn't involve using a gun?

.drj.07-40-03: and what concerns you?  that intent might be hard to show?  It 
probably is, but I don't think it's too bad.  After all, if you intend to do 
something and didn't, surely that's a lesser crime in any case than intending 
to do something and doing it.

.richard.07-40-04: Now you're being silly.

.richard.07-40-47: drj: You're right.  I might have murderous thoughts, but 
that's pretty harmless if I don't have the courage to carry them through.

.drj.07-40-51: the tricky case is where you did something, but for some reason 
it's deemed that not intending to have done it is a defence

.gavinm.07-40-58: This takes me back to my undergraduate years.  Terminal rooms 
full of people talking via Phoenix.

.drj.07-41-27: good job all this productive chatter gets logged.

.richard.07-41-31: It would be interesting if there were no distinction.  So 
killing someone with a car would be murder.  That might make people more 
careful.

.gavinm.07-41-53: If you kill someone (unlawfully), then you have usually been 
at the least careless.

.drj.07-42-11: I think there's a reasonable case for a lot of deaths in RTAs to 
be prosecuted as murder.

.richard.07-42-33: And what about lung disease caused by particulates?

.drj.07-42-39: if you drive to a pub with the intention of drinking and driving 
then the reasonable consequences are that you are going to kill someone.  and 
if you do then it's murder

.gavinm.07-43-05: I forget the gradations of unlawful killing that apply in 
Britain this week, but I think it would be lower than murder.

.drj.07-43-20: my grandad died of asbestosis (sp?)  (anway, it's a 
pneumonoconiosis I believe)

.gavinm.07-43-43: DUI, interestingly, is independent of consequences.

.drj.07-44-25: I think selling someone a product which you know to harm their 
health is assault.  If it's known to increase their chance of death 
significantly then its murder

.gavinm.07-44-35: ... and additionally somewhat arbitrary regarding safe level, 
but that doesn't worry me overly.

.drj.07-44-55: what is DUI?

.gavinm.07-45-43: Supposing it takes 25,000 cigarettes to kill me, and a 
shopkeeper sells me a pack of 25, has he committed milli-murder?

.drj.07-45-47: so I think that not giving ones workers sufficient protective 
clothing when working with asbestos is murder

.gavinm.07-45-57: Driving while Under the Influence.

.richard.07-46-26: The trouble is, you just end up redefining and weakening 
"murder".

.drj.07-46-27: hmm, perhaps I should investigate a suing Turner and Newall...  
OTOH I can't see why I should prosecute for my grandad's death

.gavinm.07-46-44: No man is an island ...

.richard.07-46-45: drj: To set a precedent.

.drj.07-48-40: how is it weakening murder?  Probably you should only prosecute 
someone if they have as a group or an individual killed on average 1.0 people 
or more.

.drj.07-49-07: that kind of makes it okay to kill milli-people though which is 
gavn's example.

.drj.07-49-27: anyway, cigarettes come in 10s and 20s

.gavinm.07-50-23: If the typical sentence for murder is 20 years, a 
milli-murder would get you out in less than a week.

.gavinm.07-50-43: I was just using fag-packet figures.

.drj.07-51-54: it wouldbe interesting if the judicial and penal system made it 
efficient to try very small crimes

.gavinm.07-52-29: It would be nice if they were getting progrssively more 
efficient over time.  I fear this is not the case.

.richard.07-53-36: drj: I mean, is your aim to "punish" (see above) all these 
crimes as much as "murder" is punished now, or something else?  It's just a 
word.

.gavinm.07-53-54: It's just semantics.

.gavinm.07-54-17: I win.  8-)

.drj.07-54-33: yes, all these crimes that I have described as murder should be 
treated just as murder is treated now.  I don't regard them as lesser crimes.

.drj.07-54-55: there is a problem in that they are not committed by an 
individual.  unfortunately that is a very hard problem.

.gavinm.07-55-15: You aim is that all men should work for the good of mankind?

.drj.07-55-48: I don't think so

.drj.07-55-55: not that I recall anyway

.drj.07-57-03: society in the large should work for the good of humanity 
(insert favourite emotionally charge agglomerate here)

.gavinm.07-57-07: So working for yourself at the expense of others (' health) 
is punishable?

.gavinm.07-57-21: struct

.richard.07-57-53: union

.drj.07-58-02: gray area.  haven't thought about it much. (and don't to right 
now).

.drj.07-58-06: enum

.gavinm.07-58-31: record

.gavinm.08-03-36: What about people killed by safety-critical software?

.drj.08-04-23: depends.  if it was within the deemed appropriate safety/death 
ratio then insurance should solve that one

.gavinm.08-04-51: You can't insure against committing murder.

.drj.08-05-17: eg, if I fly on an aircraft that has a proven service record 
that shows that it kills no more than X people per flight and that X is deemed 
to be acceptably low, and I die then no murder was committed.

.drj.08-05-35: to recompense my relatives the flight should be insured.

.gavinm.08-05-51: By whom?

.drj.08-06-07: government, the airline, the ticket purchaser?

.gavinm.08-06-23: Ah, the nanny state.

.gavinm.08-06-31: I thought we'd get to that one.

.drj.08-07-05: one of the most important things a society can do is provide 
services that cannot be got on the individual level.  insurance is a classic 
example.

.gavinm.08-08-16: I claimed last week that society had two purposes: To 
administrate common resources efficiently (government); To protect the rights 
of induhviduals (law).

.drj.08-09-44: so, insurance is a case of the former?  after all, surely it's 
cheaper for the government to insure against people dying in unlikely 
circumstances than it is anyone else?

.gavinm.08-10-14: I agree.

.drj.08-10-22: basically we have a problem that N people die per year through 
no fault of anyone's and you need some way recompense the individuals involved.

.gavinm.08-10-26: Of course it's law that makes people liable.

.gavinm.08-10-53: But it must be someone's fault (US law, paraphrased).

.drj.08-11-22: yes indeed.  clearly this is ludicrous.

.gavinm.08-12-14: US doctors have, for a long time, carried legal insurance and 
refused to stop at roadside accidents.  This is growing in the UK.

.drj.08-12-29: If I build a aeroplane that holds 1000 passengers and fails 1 in 
100,000 times, and I fly it 1000 times, then I "kill" 100 people.

.drj.08-12-49: but the benefit of having the aircraft is deemed to be worth the 
cost of killing 100 people

.gavinm.08-12-59: Um.

.drj.08-14-36: but you need insurance to stop people getting annoyed.

.gavinm.08-16-54: I just occurred to me: Given the dual purpose of society, 
should the same organization (government) administrate resources and make laws?

.gavinm.08-17-20: Fortunately, it's a different organization that administers 
the law.

.drj.08-19-02: we almost have the division in the UK.  The civil service 
administrates resources, and parliament makes law.  unfortunately a lot of the 
law is to do with the administration of resources.

.gavinm.08-20-01: One could argue that MPs shouldn't determine the remuneration 
of or restrictions on MPs.

.drj.08-28-46: indeed.  Plato says the law makers should live in military style 
barracks (essentially live like soldiers)

.gavinm.08-33-18: And he said they're not allowed to appear on television.

.richard.09-14-01: JOIN

.logbot.09-14-03: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.09-28-40: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.09-28-40.1: If I am elected no one will ever have to do their laundry 
again!

.gavinm.09-29-08: JOIN

.logbot.09-29-10: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.09-29-10.1: I can't think about that.  It doesn't go with HEDGES in the 
shape of

.logbot.09-29-10.2:  LITTLE LULU -- or ROBOTS making BRICKS...

.drj.09-30-21: spong

.lmb.14-04-46: JOIN

.logbot.14-04-49: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.14-04-49.1: A dwarf is passing out somewhere in Detroit!

.lmb.14-04-54: hi, all.

.lmb.14-10-23: where is everyone?

.gavinm.14-19-22: \hello.

.gavinm.14-19-48: David, Richard, and Nick are playing with a graphical 
calculator.

.gavinm.14-19-59: I'm reviewing the book drafts.

.lmb.14-21-34: check out doc.?.ref-man.toc

.gavinm.14-28-24: Your wish is my command.

.gavinm.14-29-18: Hmm.  Kind of sparse, isn't it?

.gavinm.14-31-05: Do you want to review any of this?

.lmb.14-31-25: well, it's all we have.

.lmb.14-31-45: yes, but i think it needs to be RFCed first.  it's really basic.

.gavinm.14-33-41: OK.

.lmb.14-33-56: i'll send out an email.

.gavinm.14-57-22: Would you like someone to read it over first?

.lmb.15-11-28: yes, please.  the format doc needs work, i know.

.lmb.15-11-39: i also want to make sure i haven't munged anyone's symbol doc. :)

.lmb.15-11-50: i haven't done a huge amount of work on it, sadly.

.lmb.15-12-03: i was thinking of asking andrew to look over it, as well.

.lmb.15-12-13: don't bother reading the allocation point protocol.

.gavinm.15-14-42: I should finish the book stuff within an hour or so.  Is that 
OK?

.lmb.15-16-22: that's fine.  i wasn't necessarily expecting anything today.

.gavinm.15-16-41:  Ok.

.gavinm.15-17-11: Tell me, is it universal in the US to consider "data" to be 
singular?

.lmb.15-19-43: not quite universal, but probably 95-98% nowadays.

.gavinm.15-20-32: It reads very awkwardly to me.

.lmb.15-29-16: what's the name of geodesic's MM product?

.drj.15-30-01: not sure it has a name

.lmb.15-31-35: oh, another "MM Product"?  :)

.lmb.15-34-27: ah, it's the great circle stuff.

.drj.15-34-53: Great Circle. that's right

.gavinm.15-36-00: We ought to have an _internal_ guide to competitors.

.drj.15-38-22: to stop us grovelling all over their web sites you mean?>

.gavinm.15-38-49: No, to help us find them.

.gavinm.15-39-03: I meant that mm ought to have an internal web page with links.

.gavinm.15-49-14: Who wants to volunteer to do that?

.lmb.15-55-54: ACTION buries her hands under her

.drj.15-56-06: oh I see.  why don't wejust have a competitors link on our 
externmal oages?

.drj.15-56-13: s/oages/pages/

.lmb.15-56-27: ACTION frowns

.gavinm.15-56-31: Sigh.

.lmb.15-56-40: i thought you gave up sarcasm, drj.

.drj.15-57-06: er, was that sarcasm?

.lmb.15-57-25: well, i can think of several reasons for not having those links 
right off the top of my head.

.lmb.15-57-30: i assume some of them are valid.

.drj.15-57-45: oh I see.  you trhink just because I'm stupid I'm also sarcastic

.gavinm.15-58-02: On the off-chance that David was serious, he should see 
mail.gavinm.1997-01-30.15-30.

.lmb.15-58-08: no, i was assuming that you were being sarcastic, rather than 
stupid.

.drj.15-58-15: tamagotchi died yesterday while I was climbing.  was 16years old

.lmb.15-58-21: i.e., giving you the benefit of the doubt.

.lmb.15-58-30: oh, you went climbing with adam?

.lmb.15-59-13: what did it die of?

.drj.16-01-10: death

.drj.16-01-14: probasbly hunger

.drj.16-01-20: was getting really hungry really quickly.

.lmb.16-01-31: were you disappointed?

.drj.16-01-39: no

.lmb.16-01-49: relieved.  :)

.drj.16-01-53: somehat relieved actually.  it was getting a real burden to care 
for it in its last days

.lmb.16-02-09: tell me about it.

.gavinm.16-02-27: Euthanasia?  What's the Japanese for that?

.lmb.16-03-08: hang on a sec, i'll look it up.

.lmb.16-04-39: anrakushi, or yuusaneijia.

.drj.16-07-23: what do "gempi" and "kozu" mean?

.drj.16-07-37: (hint: something to do with paper manufacturer, japanese words)

.lmb.16-09-02: rice/tissue paper?

.drj.16-09-53: er, yes, probably.  are they in your dictionary?

.lmb.16-09-56: are you sure you have the right vowel lengths for 'kozu'?

.drj.16-10-02: pretty sure.

.drj.16-10-08: well, actually no

.drj.16-10-28: they are the terms I saw in a catalogue of japanese paper

.lmb.16-10-56: what does "cadastral map" mean?

.drj.16-11-02: I have no idea.

.lmb.16-12-22: having to do with real estate and taxes.

.lmb.16-12-29: doesn't seem relevant.

.drj.16-19-33: hmm. perhaps there are more o's in kozu

.drj.16-19-44: what does gempi mean? which were you looking up?

.lmb.16-26-21: genpishi.  rice paper.

.lmb.16-26-31: one the web japanese dictionary.

.lmb.16-26-41: on, even.

.lmb.16-41-14: are 'integer constant' and 'integral constant' the same?

.drj.16-45-36: no idea

.drj.16-45-40: probably

.drj.16-45-58: are they terms you've seen in random documentation or are they 
in the standard or something like that?

.lmb.16-55-24: they're in the symbol doc.

.drj.16-56-38: then they probably mean the same thing

.lmb.16-56-56: okay.  i should standardize them.

.lmb.16-57-04: i mutilated fmt_t, btw.

.lmb.16-57-20: moved lots of it to protocol.mps.format

.drj.16-59-16: I read your email

.drj.16-59-20: news on integer constants

.lmb.16-59-31: eh?

.drj.16-59-58: see defines "integer constants" caluse 6.1.3.2

.lmb.17-00-17: eh?  in the ansi c standard, you mean?

.drj.17-00-21: yes

.lmb.17-00-29: i don't have a copy.  :(

.drj.17-00-35: which is basically a constant integer literal like

.drj.17-00-37: 10

.drj.17-00-45: 0xff

.drj.17-00-49: 071

.drj.17-00-50: 6uL

.drj.17-01-13: it also defines "integral constant expression" clause 6.4

.lmb.17-01-39: okay.  so they're not the same, then.

.drj.17-01-51: which is basically an expression that involves only integer 
constants (and a few other things).  eg.

.drj.17-01-58: 3+2

.drj.17-02-02: 6*-9

.drj.17-02-22: (int)6.7

.drj.17-02-26: amusingly enough

.drj.17-02-51: so, if you (in your C program) a constant integer an "integral 
constant epxression" will do

.lmb.17-02-56: i can't find harlqn.memory-management.  i wonder if any articles 
are being posted to it.

.drj.17-03-03: howver, this is clearly a ludicrous term to be bandying about a 
lot.

.lmb.17-03-07: that doesn't parse, drj.

.drj.17-03-18: s/)/&want/

.lmb.17-05-13: gavin, where's the newsgroup gone?  it's had no articles posted 
since thursday or so.

.drj.17-05-32: so complain to spring-support / sysadmins

.lmb.17-05-36: i never did see drj's article on style, since there was nothing 
there when i looked.

.lmb.17-05-47: i think gavin has a procedure for checking.

.lmb.17-06-24: i assume you've all been sending mail, right?

.drj.17-06-31: so perhaps we should use a term like "constant integer" and 
explain that we mean an "integral constant expression", reference the C 
standard and paraphase / simplify

.lmb.17-09-49: ah, but would you really say something like "#define 
MPS_WORD_WIDTH 6*-9"?

.drj.17-10-08: no, we'd say #define MPS_WORD_WIDTH (6*-9)

.drj.17-10-15: more importantly, we might well say

.drj.17-10-45: #define MPS_WORD_WIDTH (1uL<<(MPS_WORD_SHIFT))

.drj.17-10-54: to define one constant in terms on another.

.drj.17-10-58: or indeed:

.lmb.17-11-25: okay, okay, point made.

.drj.17-11-36: #define MPS_WORD_WIDTH (sizeof(mps_word_t) * CHAR_BIT)

.drj.17-12-08: and even if I know what the number is

.drj.17-12-22: #define ONE_MEGABYTE (1uL*1024*1024)

.lmb.17-12-23: ACTION wonders whether she can get ken to retroactively approve 
the purchase of the "annotated ansi c standard"

.drj.17-12-26: is clear than

.lmb.17-12-41: what is "1uL"?

.drj.17-12-45: #define ONE_MEGABYTE 1048576

.lmb.17-12-57: thank you.

.drj.17-13-05: U and L are suffixes that are allowed in the syntx of integer 
constants

.lmb.17-13-17: "unsigned long"?

.drj.17-13-17: U means unsigned, L means long

.drj.17-13-23: 1 is an integer

.lmb.17-13-30: ACTION gives herself a tiny pat on the head

.drj.17-13-31: 1u is an unsigned integer

.drj.17-13-34: 1l is a long

.drj.17-13-40: 1ul is an unsigned long

.gavinm.17-13-47: Looking into news now.

.drj.17-14-17: u and L can appear in either case.  I use uL for typographic 
visibility (U and l are easily confused with digits in some founts), the rest 
of the group think I am mad for doing this

.drj.17-14-28: well done lmb

.gavinm.17-15-02: News and MM Information both seem to be up to date, as far as 
mail.lmb.1997-06-23.15-53.

.richard.17-15-08: JOIN

.logbot.17-15-10: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.17-15-10.1: Somewhere in suburban Honolulu, an unemployed bellhop is 
whipping up

.logbot.17-15-10.2:  a batch of illegal psilocybin chop suey!!

.drj.17-15-17: perhaps the 1cc new spools are shafted

.gavinm.17-15-30: I'll check 1cc.

.lmb.17-15-36: perhaps.  phantom is having real problems.

.drj.17-15-46: can you see other news groups?

.lmb.17-16-12: ones that i hadn't looked at as of last wednesday, yes.

.lmb.17-17-03: the last article in harlqn.memory-management.documentation is 
dated wed, june 18.

.lmb.17-17-23: and is from you, gavin.  mind you, i think there's only been one 
since.

.gavinm.17-18-06: 1cc's newshost is out of date.  I'll tell systems.

.lmb.17-18-25: what is our newshost?  if it's phantom, don't bother.

.gavinm.17-19-41: It's talking to me, and it's out of date.  I've reported it.

.gavinm.17-20-05: Try using newshost.cam.harlequin.co.uk, or use MM Information.

.gavinm.17-20-43: Have you tried "History\All Things Categorised by Modified 
Day"?

.drj.17-20-49: your newshost is newshost.harlequin.com

.drj.17-20-55: who knows what that is.

.lmb.17-21-09: it's not terribly important.  it's just that it requires few 
enough fingers that i can do it while eating lunch.

.gavinm.17-21-13: Or "Mail\Categorised by Newsgroup"?

.gavinm.17-22-08: epcot

.lmb.17-24-23: oh, right.  no excuse, then.  epcot should be fine.

.lmb.17-24-28: ta, gavin.

.gavinm.17-40-21: It should be possible to browse the mailing lists in MM 
Information.

.gavinm.17-40-42: If it isn't, it may be possible to fix it.

.gavinm.17-41-35: Phew!  I've finished my book comments.

.gavinm.17-42-13: Now I just have some faffing to do, and I'll start on your 
documentation.

.gavinm.17-42-24: By the way, I'm now the only one left in the Pool Hall.

.lmb.18-03-16: JOIN

.logbot.18-03-18: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.lmb.18-03-19: re.

.gavinm.18-09-00: Hello.

.logbot.18-10-00: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-23

.logbot.18-10-00.1: I appoint you ambassador to Fantasy Island!!!

.lmb.18-13-15: i crashed lantra again. :(

.gavinm.18-13-25: I see you were working on Saturday.

.lmb.18-13-39: yup.

.gavinm.18-13-43: Ah.  What's lantra?

.lmb.18-13-46: ACTION is dedicated to mm :)

.lmb.18-13-55: the 1cc dns server.

.lmb.18-14-02: also known as the machine on my desk.

.gavinm.18-14-19: Test.

.gavinm.18-14-30: also known as the machine on my desk

.gavinm.18-14-35: Test.

.gavinm.18-14-41: Ah.  That's better.

.gavinm.18-15-08: My IRC client has odd ideas about font.

.gavinm.18-21-35: How do you want my comments?

.lmb.18-31-44: er...email is probably fine.

.lmb.18-31-50: ACTION braces herself

.lmb.18-32-07: did you read the allocation point protocol?

.gavinm.18-32-18: Not yet.

.lmb.18-32-52: well, don't bother.  it's horribly out of date.  was written in 
january.

.gavinm.18-35-06: ACTION listens to his favourite Bjork track.

.lmb.18-35-54: does anyone here use Xvision?

.gavinm.18-36-17: I do.  I am.

.lmb.18-36-43: how is it?

.lmb.18-38-46: does it make your life easier than having an xterm?

.gavinm.18-39-47: It works OK now I'm using a more powerful PC.  I just have a 
couple of xterms and an emacs hanging around as if they were PC applications.

.lmb.18-40-05: how big is your monitor?

.lmb.18-40-19: how much does an xerm cost, btw?

.lmb.18-40-59: you don't have to stay late tonight to review my doc.

.gavinm.18-41-18: 15"

.lmb.18-41-35: eeeeuuuuuwwwww.  :)

.gavinm.18-42-00: An xterminal doesn't cost much.  A few hundred tops.

.lmb.18-42-13: roland is trying to convince me to use xvision on my pc.  i told 
him only if i can get the same size monitor as my current unix monitor.

.gavinm.18-42-19: I'll do a bit and then go.

.gavinm.18-42-32: You've got until Bjork finishes.  8-)

.lmb.18-46-28: how appalled are you already?  :)

.gavinm.18-48-08: I'm deleting lots. 

.gavinm.18-48-13: That's good.

.lmb.18-48-35: deleting lots of what?

.lmb.18-49-58: what i really want is a mac. :)

.gavinm.18-52-00: Me too.

.lmb.18-52-10: i thought you had one.

.gavinm.18-52-23: I've got an old slow one.

.gavinm.18-52-32: It won't be able to run Notes 4.

.lmb.18-52-40: are you getting a new one?

.gavinm.18-52-51: Supposedly.

.gavinm.18-53-17: I think the latest estimate was 1997-06-16.

.lmb.18-53-27: ACTION snorts

.lmb.18-53-57: hey...that answers a long-standing question of mine.

.gavinm.18-53-58: There you go.  See mail.

.gavinm.18-54-04: What?

.lmb.18-54-07: ta.

.lmb.18-54-17: why 'snog' sounds like something that pigs do.  it's similar to 
'snort'.

.gavinm.18-54-48: Ah.

.gavinm.18-59-39: 16 minutes remaining.

.lmb.19-02-52: that should be enough time to comment on the assertions protocol.

.gavinm.19-15-20: There you go.

.gavinm.19-15-30: With 10 seconds left.

.gavinm.19-16-23: No time for the assertions protocol.

.gavinm.19-16-50: Good night.

.lmb.19-30-31: good night!


