             NOTES FROM THE MM/PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-12-09
                       meeting.product.1996-12-09
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-12-09

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Jo Blishen <jblishen>, Clive Harris 
<cliveh>, and Mark Preece <mwp> met to discuss Memory Management product 
progress.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Jo: No motion on the goals and requirements.  More understanding due to chat 
with Tucker.  ML has been distracting me a lot.  I have defined a release in 
Darwin (release.thursdaypm)  Now feel confident enough to go in and fiddle 
about with Darwin, so we can start using it.


MARKETING


Competitive Product Analysis

Clive: The spending freeze has prevented us getting the orders through.

Jo: Has is slackened again?  They've just approved InstallShield for everyone 
now.  We can make products now.

Clive: I will stay on top of this.


Answering Anti-GC Articles

Richard: Rather than writing responses we have been writing material for the 
web pages and will continue to do so.  Our efforts are probably better 
concentrated in writing articles for publication there.


Web Pages

Richard: Beta release delayed due to problem with licence agreement.

Gavin: The problem has to do with the wording of the license and how it relates 
to publishing our own academic text later, not-for-profit use, etc.  We had 
legally approved text, but a couple of people said it wasn't in line with our 
requirements.

Richard: We will go ahead with the beta release before Christmas, and the full 
release at the beginning of January, when people are likely to spend time 
looking at the pages.


DEVELOPMENT


Status and Progress Reporting

Richard: I will restart progress reporting procedures which fell by the wayside 
somewhat while I was on holiday.  I did put in a programme report summarizing 
everything.  I will update this again before Christmas.


Tools Developer

Richard: We're reevaluating the situation because even a star developer hired 
now is unlikely to be able to produce the product as envisioned quickly enough.

Clive: Jo (Marks) wants something out in July.


Toy System

Richard: Should have instructions with you today or tomorrow. 
(meeting.product.1996-11-01.act.toy)

Jo: Will have another go with Look@Me.


QA

Mark: Nothing much to report.  Richard Tucker is getting along fine.  We just 
hired a high-level QA guy in Dylan, and put him in touch with Richard.  He's at 
1CC.


DOCUMENTATION

Richard: I have arranged to start the documentation effort with Leah in early 
January, when I visit 1CC (discharging meeting.product.1996-11-01.act.doc).

Jo: Ken says this is OK.  Trying to get work permit for replacement.


CONSULTANCY

Richard: Tucker's work with MIT is now complete.  He has fixed all but one of 
their problems.  This seems to have been a successful bit of consultancy for 
the MM Group.


ACTIONS

.act.toy: Development will deliver a MM to Jo and Clive to play with.

.act.look: Clive and Jo will make another attempt to see Tucker's tool 
prototype using Look@Me.

.act.report: Richard will restart weekly progress reporting.


NEXT MEETING

.next: Richard, Jo, and Clive will meet to reevaluate and plan the product on 
1997-01-06 to 07.

