             NOTES FROM THE MM QUARTET MEETING, 1997-05-13
                       meeting.quartet.1997-05-13
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-05-19

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Chris Cox <chrisc>, Nick Levine
<nick>, Mark Preece <mwp>, and Clive Harris <cliveh> met to discuss MM
Product Progress and officially hand over the position of Product
Marketing Manager to Chris Cox.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

meeting.quartet.1997-04-14.act.rival.approve: To protect ourselves
against possible litigation the MM Information database is being
dumped (today) and printed out as hardcopy and filed with Sharon from
Legal.  Sharon will also check license agreements.  Tucker will get
products.



DEVELOPMENT

.dev.sheep.moyse: Sheep has talked to Rod Moyse.

.dev.sheep.cox: Sheep has also talked to Chris Page and Hugh Green of
the Dylan Group.

.dev.man: Still no sign of a Group Manager. This needs to be
accelerated. Nick will prod HR (to determine the level of response to
the Web advert) & George Cleland, when the opportunities arise.


DOCUMENTATION

.doc.leah.reassign: The project plan (such as we have!) is
compromised. George thinks that this was handled wrongly, and has told
Nick that he intended to talk to Glenn Bach. Nick to prod George as
soon as an opportunity presents itself.

.doc.leah.visit: Leah will be visiting the Pool Hall, for two days in
the last week of May. Specific meetings can be scheduled then.

.doc.thumbnail: Thumbnail reference documentation likely approximately
at the end of June, but in Leah's absense this will not be in a
consistent (or even, useable) state.


QA

.qa: Mark Preece met Richard Tucker for 1.5-2 hours, after the last
quartet meeting. This was very useful and Mark is happy with the
progress of MM QA. 

.qa.part-time: Richard remains on 1.5 days/week until he submits his
PhD. 


MARKETING

.mkt.release: Agreed on need for an early demonstrator release of the
dropin technology. To be preceeded (v approximately 2 weeks after
Sunflower) by a baseline release of MPS so we can identify what we
have now. These releases to be defined by Nick & Richard when they
next meet to work on the product plan.


.mkt.rivals: Chris to check the rivals.* in MM Info against the
various rivals' web pages.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

.pm.scope: Scope of meetings will be expanded gradually. We will take
the ML product on board first, because of the overlap of personnel.
Chris (& Nick?) to read requirement specs.

.pm.ml: Nick to check scheduling requirements of ml (tikka release)
requests and work on scheduling with Nick B (& report back to ML
quartet). 

.pm.license: Nick to forward the proposed strategy to the mm quartet,
for information. Then to George and Legal for approval.


ACTIONS

.act.name: The "corporate naming committee" meets next Tuesday
(1997-05-20) to work towards an external name for the external
product. Nick to ensure that Richard is included in this.

.act.plan: Nick and Richard have started work on the MM product plan,
and will continue with this.

.act.prod: Nick will prod HR concerning Development Manager recruitment
(to determine the level of response to the Web advert) & George Cleland,
when the opportunities arise.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1997-05-27 15:00 BST (note earlier time)

