      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-07-17
                       meeting.product.1996-07-17
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-07-17

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Alex Parnes <alexp>, Richard Brooksby <richard>, Clive Harris <cliveh>, 
and Mark Preece <mwp> met to discuss MM Quartet issues.  Ken Jackson <kenj> 
joined in later.


RESOURCES

Alex: [To Richard only] I talked to George about recruiting situation.  George 
will address it and is in constant touch with HR and Richard.  He supports the 
need for developer resource.  It has to be approved by SP divisional manager, 
George and Jo.  I made him aware as "product manager" speaking to "divisional 
manager".


PROPOSAL

[The "proposal" is analysis.product -- richard]

Alex: Everybody has read the proposal.  I have read the intro, executive 
summary, and decisions, and skimmed over the middle sections.

Mark: I have to say I've never read anything so complete.

Richard: Thanks.

Alex: Senior management has been reminded about the product document, but no 
response has been received from senior management.

Clive: That's not unusual.  It sometimes takes up to six weeks to get any sort 
of response.

Alex: We're seeking approval from Quartet and Board level.  The Quartet 
approves.  We are now seeking Board level approval, but for what exactly?

Clive: The resource approval are important.  We also want approval of the 
process the document espouses.

Alex: I'm not sure I know what you mean.  You mentioned resources and the 
product vision.  Clive has talked to Jo about the vision, and the document 
reflects his view, so maybe we don't need that confirmation.  With respect to 
resources (section 8.2): the tools developer resource is approved, and George 
Cleland is acting on that.  We're OK unless he comes back with a problem.  QA 
has started rolling, though we haven't had much luck.  Mark is interviewing, 
and we may be able to release an existing QA person by hiring a new one.  Mark 
is looking at all sorts of options.

Mark: I am certainly looking at many different options, not just new hires.

Clive: I do think that the board should look at the document to check it, 
though.

Alex: I agree, but we don't have to wait.  I want to move ahead.  Since this is 
consistent with Jo's vision I don't see why we should stop.  We are seeking 
approval, but it's not on the critical path, agreed?

[Everyone agrees.]

Alex: Mark, please involve Richard in the final selection of MM QA, including 
if you transfer someone internally.

Mark: Richard and I should talk over the phone to reduce the turn around times.


USABILITY ANALYSIS

Alex: Have we all seen Rod's document.

ACTION: Richard will send pointers round.

Alex: Richard, can you say how useful Rod's work has been?

Richard: Rod has produced a very complete and thorough analysis of the 
interviews he did with Harlequin employees.  He's now working with Tucker.  
Rod's work is giving us something concrete to work with so that we can get to 
tool design.

Alex: Will you need time from a UI designer?

Richard: The tools should be looked at by a UI designer, but we don't need one 
full time on the project, I would say.  Maybe a couple of week's work between 
now and the product release.

Alex: Nancy gardener can put some time in.  She's tied up with Dylan work at 
the moment but time might become available later.


OTHER BUSINESS


Sun Java

Richard: Is there any news about the Sun deal?

Clive: I've pestered George but had no reply.

Richard: Can we do anything?

Clive: It's George's responsibility.

Alex: We should push him, could it could be crucial to the development effort.

Clive: It could be a very big deal for Harlequin.

Richard: We should at least get a status report.

ACTION: Clive will push George and send report to Quartet.


Documentation

Richard: I've discussed the form of the documentation with Ken, but we've not 
been assigned any documentation resource yet.

Alex: I'll bring Ken in.

[Alex phones Ken.]

Alex: Do you have an idea of what is the size of the task, perhaps we can 
continue with the review of Friday that we're going to do.  [I don't understand 
what that means -- richard]

Ken: Bob matthews looked at it and it's about 6 months work to product level.

Alex: What do we need to do is commit a resource.  Let's discuss it again and 
come back at the next meeting, or even sooner by mail to the quartet.

ACTION: Alex and Ken to report back with resource commitments.


Buying the Competition

Clive: A few thousand dollars required to buy some competing products.

Alex: Benefit?

Clive: We can study it for competition.

Alex: Development benefit?

Richard: We're interested in seeing the feature set.

Alex: QA?

Mark: We can use them as benchmarks against which we can measure the MM Product.

Alex: Is PeterB likely to object?

Clive: No.

Alex: Go to him first.

ACTION: Clive to put in PO for rival products and get it approved by Peter, or 
Alex if Peter punts.


ACTIONS

.act.ta: Richard will send round pointers to Rod's task analysis.

.act.george: Clive Harris will contact George Reiner to push him along with Sun 
Java and obtain a status report which he will forward to the Quartet.

.act.comp: Clive will attempt to purchase competitive products for marketing 
and development analysis.

.act.doc: Alex will discuss documentation resources with Ken Jackson and 
forward the results to the Quartet.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-08-01 16:00 BST (Thursday August 1st).

