             NOTES FROM THE MM QUARTET MEETING, 1997-04-29
                       meeting.quartet.1997-04-29
                             incomplete doc
                           richard 1997-04-29

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Jo Blishen <jblishen>, Nick Levine <nick>, 
Mark Preece <mwp>, and Clive Harris <cliveh> met to discuss MM Product Progress 
and officially hand over the position of Product Manager to Nick Levine.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

meeting.quartet.1997-04-14.act.rival.approve: Richard spoke to George Cleland 
about getting rival products.  To protect ourselves against possible litigation 
the MM Information database is going to be dumped and filed with a lawyer.  
Sharon will also check license agreements.  Tucker will get products.

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.book.approval: Jo has written book paragraph.  
Senior management haven't responded.  Nick will take it up.


DEVELOPMENT

.dev.sheep.moyse: Sheep should meet Rod Moyse (or HCI) to inform him about 
work.  Sheep is already working from analysis.task (Rod's previous work).

.dev.sheep.cox: Sheep should also meet Chris Page of the Dylan Group, who is 
working on the profiler UI.  Jo says Dylan profiler UI has been goal-reduced, 
but they should still talk.

.dev.tool.java: Richard explains how Sheep is talking of parallel Dylan and 
Java implementations.

.dev.tool.dylan: Clive has no comment on the user interface in Dylan.  Clive 
likes the idea that Dylan customers can deliver MM-tunable applications.  Dylan 
customers may end up working in environments with specialized MM requirements.  
Mark: Dylan has always sold itself as mainstreaming of MM.

.dev.man: Martin Harriss didn't get interviewed as a Group Manager.  George 
Cleland probably decided against.  Richard has not heard anything.  An 
advertisement has gone up on web <URL:http://www.harlequin.com/full/mmman.html
>.


DOCUMENTATION

.doc: Reference documentation is being written by the whole group.


QA

.qa: Mark Preece is meeting Richard Tucker after this meeting.  General opinion 
is that Richard is doing well.


MARKETING

.mkt.new-person: Chris Cox is starting next Tuesday.  Indication that senior 
management think he should be doing MM and ML.  He has to fit in to the vision 
of the product.  Will introduce him to Richard next week.  Try to assess 
whether relationship would work.  Would be replacing Clive specifically in MM, 
but Clive would stay involved at the broad level, though focussing on Lisp and 
Dylan.  He'll be based at the House.  Jo Blishen would also like to meet him.  
Clive will bring him to Edinburgh.

.mkt.release: In December Clive asked for an instantiation of the product as it 
then was, resulting in release.mps.thursdaypm.  Clive asks whether it would be 
a good idea to have staged releases?  Richard says yes, this is exactly how he 
wants to work -- evolutionary delivery.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

.pm.nick: Nick expects to be more on the ball next time.

.pm.scope: Scope of meetings (whether to include internal products) will be 
decided later.

.pm.desc: Richard has produced an outline product description 
(design.product.arch) but it needs finishing.


ACTIONS

.act.name: Clive to ask "corporate naming committee" for a name for the product.

.act.plan: Nick and Richard to produce first draft of MM product plan.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1997-05-13 15:30 BST

