      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-08-05
                       meeting.product.1996-08-05
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-08-05

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Alex Parnes <alexp>, Clive Harris <cliveh>, 
and Mark Preece <mwp> met to discuss the Memory Management Products.  Ken 
Jackson <kenj> joined later.


PRODUCT PROPOSAL

Alex: Any feedback on the proposal?

Clive: None.

Alex: Salary review and reorganization has taken a lot of senior management 
attention.  Perhaps now it the time for a reminder.  I will generate a reminder 
if a stronger one is necessary.

Clive: Please do that.  [See .act.remind.]


MEMORY MANAGEMENT QA

Mark: I have someone who is a possibility for QA.  I have asked Karen to pass 
the CV on to Richard.

Richard: I know someone who's recently applied who is interested in the 
position, and also in HCI and other quality issues, but also has development 
skills.

Mark: That could be great.

Alex: I will be in UK in two weeks from tomorrow.  I'd like to meet your 
associate.

Richard: I will try to arrange it.  [See .act.qa.]

Alex: I'm also seeing Bill Kurz, but I haven't decided where he belongs yet.  
We have nothing else in the pipeline for MM QA.


HCI

Alex: Any news on HCI?

Richard: I will be at 1CC next week and will be developing tool designs based 
on Rod and Tucker's work.  We should have rough designs next week.  [These will 
then be evaluated by Rod -- richard]


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Alex: I am going to California tomorrow to interview product managers.  Memory 
Management may well be on the portfolio for someone there.


DOCUMENTATION

Alex: I met Ken and reviewed documentation plans.  There is not scheduled 
activity for MM.  We intend to hire a new documentor in the UK who would work 
principally on MM.

Richard: My original estimate, worked out with Bob Matthews, was _eight_ months 
for a new person, and six months for an existing documentor.

Alex: Let's bring Ken in.

[Ken comes in.]

Ken: We have a resume for someone in the UK.

Alex: Any opportunities for reshuffling.

Ken: There may be some overlap with Dylan.


MEMORY MANAGEMENT BOOKS

Clive: We have the opportunity for an MM Book, but I feel that the resources 
aren't really there at the moment.

Richard: Tucker is keen, but the book he is thinking of overlaps a lot with the 
work we need to do to develop good tools.  I have instructed him to work on the 
overlapping material, so we will have material for the book without any 
overhead.

Clive: OK.


COMPETITIVE PRODUCTS

Clive: Which ones again?

Richard: SmartHeap and Great Circle.

Alex: Go ahead.  The Quartet has approved it.  [See .act.comp.]



ACTIONS

.act.remind: Alex will remind managers to look at the proposal.

.act.comp: Clive will purchase competitive products for marketing and 
development analysis.

.act.qa: Richard will work on the possible recruitment of Richard Tucker and 
attempt to have him meet Alex in the UK in two weeks' time.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-08-12 at 15:00 BST (Monday August 12th).

