             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-02-16
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-02-16

start 1999-02-16, 11:37 GMT


Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>


NEWS

tony: pekka's reestablished us on the gc-list (lapsed a few months ago).

tony: andy's very close to finishing the stack-scan stuff. I've looked at
and commented on a draft of his document.

daveb: JVM from sun yet?

drj: No. Sharon resent a fax last week; apart from that I've no news.

rit: I've moved office into the Enchanted Garden.

tony: Yes, and we think Andy Sizer may be moving in as well, at least
temporarily.

pekka: He told me he'll move today or tomorrow.



RELEASES

tony: brisling's now gone to EP, and is in ScriptWorks QA.
tony: I've been catching up with approvals, and looking at poolams.

tony: Next release is Java. Fact that we don't have JVM yet will have an
effect of course. Assumption in plan is that we'll have it by this time
next week. Seems pretty uncertain.

tony: Issues with what we need to do about weakness: 1) do we need to do
any at all? If we get JDK 1.1 then there's no weakness in it anyway. If
it's 1.2 then there is.

pekka: Why would we get an old version?
drj: 'cos that's what they might be licensing.

tony: 2) Doc for 1.2 is slightly confused about what the behaviour of
weakness is.

drj: I've been working on a document which explains the problems and says
what we think should happen.

daveb: What's the problem?

tony: Issue is what should happen when a weak reference refers to another
kind of weak or final reference. Rules seem to have been very carefully
written, but we don't think they make sense.

daveb: Do you need to take this up with Sun?

tony, drj: Might do, yeah.

tony: We still think that whatever the semantics really are, we can
implement them with MPS rank mechanism.

pekka: I thought there was a real question about whether we could do that...

tony: Yes, there's an interpretation which would be hard to do in the hacky
version (before cleanup of ranks and resolve-preserve).

drj, tony: For an early version we may not need to get the exact semantics
correct.

tony: Given that the description seems to be broken, I can only assume that
there can't be many Java programs out there which depend on exactly what it
is.

tony: We are going with biscuit names, and drj's picked the first one:
amaretto.


PLAN


tony: Updated it quite a bit, and spent some time with rit putting QA tasks in.

tony: Unfortunately there's a problem with the GIFs. The two that are
impossible to read are rit's and the group plan. Problem seems to be
something to do with too many tasks and the font going wrong. Other
individual views I think are ok.

tony: Main changes:
- adding the QA tasks
- tasks for release effort for future releases -- both QA and development
effort. I'd like rit to check that the plan for these tasks is reasonable.

tony: Plan shows the development work for early java release finishing
around 18th March. Should have release by 25th.

tony: There are some dependencies between rit's QA work and the development
part of the plan. But scope for more. And when talking to rit yesterday
some more dependencies became clear.


WORK PRACTICES

tony: daveb -  I got my MSDN subscription renewal form last week. Normally
I'd take it to sysadmins, but I tried that last week, and they said that
they've had a whole stack of them and accounts are complaining. And that to
have a renewal in timely fashion I'd have to go through you. Is that ok?

daveb: Yes. Put in a purchase request.

tony: What do we have in mind for the java benchmarks?

tony: background: Last summer we had intern -- Lars Hansen -- who worked on
a suite of benchmarks for Java. Intention was (1) publically available, get
our name associated with Java; (2) be useful to us and others to
investigate performance of memory management in JVM.

tony: I can't remember if we've discussed this recently. I can believe we
don't want to make a decision about it now, but I wanted to raise it.
Question is: do we want to go ahead with original plan of publically
releasing it? Gets some kudos, but of course some effort in publicising and
maintaining them.

daveb: Probably interesting to wait to see how we perform on them
ourselves! Benefit from publishing is just kudos?

tony: Yes, and also increases awareness of memory management as an issue in
Java. That might increase the chances of OEM deals.

daveb: I think I'll take that to the Quartet and see how marketing want to
play it.



AOB

daveb: Since plan not up to date, what are people currently working on?

drj: Some time looking at java weakness. More on looking at process and on
Darwinising the java work.

tony: Pekka is finishing the collection strategy metrics, necessary for the
new collection strategy prototype. Then segment placement work, aka locus
manager.

pekka: Yes, I expect I'll spend some time on the stack scanning when Andy
sends it out.

tony: I've been looking at implementation of AMS, and particularly the
representation of colour. Also looking at stack scanning with Andy.
Approvals. Removal of segments.

tony: Richard's next task is to learn Java.

daveb: rit, something relevant came up in the test-suites meeting, but I
can't remember what it was.

rit: Ah yes, you're right. Damn, I can't remember either, or find any note
of it. One thing that came up was question of developers writing tests to
check all new development (not the same as QA tests, though they could use
the same harness if they wanted to). But I don't think that was it.

daveb: Should find out what it was when Amanda sends out the notes from
that meeting.


