               BRIEF MEETING BETWEEN MM/DYLAN 1998-01-12
                        meeting.dylan.1998-01-12
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1998-01-12

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Tony Mann <Tony>, Gavin Matthews <GavinM>, and David Jones <DRJ> met 
briefly to discuss the intent and schedule for version.dylan.meadow-lark.  
Richard Tucker <RIT> and Nick Dalton <Sheep> were in the room.


SCHEDULES

.delay: The planned release date for version.dylan.meadow-lark of 1998-01-16 
Friday was based on a release date for the Dylan Personal Release of 
1998-01-30.  This has now been slipped by a month.

.move: The MM Group will be moving rooms on 1998-01-16 Friday, which will be a 
little disruptive.

.before-leaving: It is important that version.dylan.meadow-lark be released 
before Tony leaves the Dylan Group.

.sched.qa: It was decided that version.dylan.meadow-lark will be released to QA 
and Tony by 1998-01-23 Friday, probably before.

.sched.dylan: It was decided that version.dylan.meadow-lark will be release to 
Dylan by 1998-01-30 Friday.


INTENT

.perf: version.dylan.meadow-lark will contain small performance improvements, 
especially with respect to the use of the LO Pool.

.abort: [request.dylan.170560] version.dylan.meadow-lark will avoid aborting if 
memory is exhausted by the collector.

.fail: [request.dylan.170087] We don't have a clear enough idea of how to avoid 
failing an allocation in incorporate this.  Various ideas were discussed, and 
Gavin will circulate an RFC.

.extend: [request.dylan.170220, requst.dylan.170029, request.dylan.170028, 
request.dylan.170057] It isn't necessary to provide an extensible arena in 
version.dylan.meadow-lark.  These requirements can be met in the short-term by 
adjusting the parameters supplied to mps_arena_create.

.control: [request.dylan.170423] We have insufficient idea how to control the 
collection strategy to provide this.  Various ideas were discussed including a 
user-supplied indication of available physical memory, and the detection of 
excessive paging; both of these could be used to dynamically control collection 
eagerness.


OTHER

.future: The next Dylan release will be the Enterprise release and will be 
around 1998-04-30.  version.dylan.box-turtle is likely to be released around 
1997-03-31.  It's content is as yet undecided.

.debugger: It is not yet known whether version.dylan.cottonwood's debugger 
problems will require any further change to the DMM.  Tony will advise on this 
as soon as possible.

