             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-02-09
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-02-09

start 1999-02-09, 11:37 GMT

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>


tony: no rit as he is at funeral.

NEWS

tony: First thing, did brisling.3 last week.  Bug in bit table code; got
fixed, quite a lot of last week spent releasing it which went to epcore
on Friday.

tony: Quartet are looking into product/oem opportunities.

tony: rt-java mailing list, perhaps not going too well.  And perhaps not
too important.

daveb: What is the controversy? 

tony: Dispute between sun and this list about who should be in control.

tony: Message yesterday seemed to have very opposed viewpoint from
recent meeting so perhaps chances of consensus are slim.  But message
was full of sense.

daveb: basic issue?

tony: are that the requirements and general approach so far are
attempting to bolt-on a real-time extension to existing JVMs such that
there is a separate rt java world and a vanilla java world in the JVM.
Contrary viewpoint was that why not just make the whole existing JVM
realtime.  Notes that there is a burden on implementor with specifying
costs.

daveb: that's more natural.

tony: issue is backwards compatiblity.  Meeting approach makes it easy
to extend existing JVMs in a simple way.

daveb: backwards compatibility is important.

tony: but they're not talking about language compatibility, they're
talking about JVM compatiblity.  ie ease with which existing JVMs can be
extended to meet proposal.  Which seems very short sighted.

tony: some more discussions with jonathan about Dylan call caches.
Still not clear exactly where the performance is going.  Problem looks
less likely to be MM related as previously thought.  EG boehm collector
shows similar performance.  Avoiding write barriers doesn't increase
performance.  Gave jonathan a CAP enabled build of
release.dylan.jackdaw.  No feedback yet.  We should help out if we can.
Perhaps we should give CAP enabled builds in future?

pekka: Announced the web release to gc-list and some newsgroups.  Got 2
replies.  1: "great resource".  David Stoutamire suggested one of
his papers should be in the bibliography.  He's been working on Sather.  Get
website stats at end of month.

tony: paper good?

pekka: abstract representation of locality.  Allows programmer to
specify which things should be near each other.  Will make bibliography entry.


RELEASES

tony: brisling.3; no QA report.  rit had time for some quick QA; changes
weren't substantial.  Confident that QA has been enough.  Backlog of
approvals is being worked through.  E.G. AMS approval is nearly done,
hopefully finish today.  Brisling no longer current.

tony: JVM source license has been signed (apparently) but no source yet.


PLAN

tony: no source hasn't delayed early JVM milestone.  But if not here by
end of week could be a problem.

daveb: what happened with email with Sharon?

drj: Sharon said she'd get back to sun.  Will ask again.

tony: new plan has brisling patches and loose ends task.  Represents
brisling.3 release and approval/darwin stuff.  Work that is ongoing,
main priority is java, locus manager, segment removal, collection
strategy.  Would add rit's work, but hasn't happened because rit was
QAing brisling.3.  Should do that this week.  Happy to receive any
comments on the plan.

tony: last week we discussed the possibility of an EPCore meeting.

pekka: hasn't happened.  Haven't had time to prepare.  Maybe this week.
They're pretty busy too because they have a release.

pekka: given that we're about to do a java release.  We need darwin
stuff for it.

drj: I'll look into darwinising everything for the java stuff.

tony: naming scheme for java releases?

drj: not yet.

daveb: types of biscuit (for dunking into java).

all: not bad.


WORK PRACTICES

AOB

daveb: what about andys' stack scanning design?

tony: ongoing.  He's working on writing it all up.  He is hoping to get
something out today.  He's been working quite hard on that.  Vast bulk
now is about Dylan work for stack scanning.

drj: any news about new dylan platforms?

daveb: good question. tony, jonathan, andys, daveb met and discussed
sparc/solaris port which looks quite likely.  Some stuff overlaps with
linux so a linux port might come almost for free.  Need to look at plan
to see exactly when we'd need MPS.

tony: MPS might not be necessary for initial integration because boehm
collector might do okay.  MPS might be okay quite late on.

drj: OTOH a linux port might not be too much effort.  A couple of days
work.

tony: dylan plan has incremental milestones.  If those are used for
structuring work then first release will be single threaded only.
Which may help MPS get early releases.

tony: anything else?

tony: we are done.

Finish 12:04

27 mins
finish 12:04

