             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-01-19
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-02-02

Start 1999-01-19, 11:30 GMT

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>.


NEWS

brisling branch has been done, and QA will get it today

pekka: they just did!

tony: presentation to EPCore yesterday. I think it was well received. We
got some useful information across and some useful messages. I came away
with the impression that dtb was positive in general about MPS, and also
realistic in his expectations about what he's going to get in brisling.

tony: Let's follow modified agenda.


CURRENT RELEASE -- BRISLING

tony: Development now sort-of finished, but we know VM work needs some
cleanup. We think it's ok for SW, but has broken stuff needed for GC. Also
some approvals still to do. We have an important hard deadline of getting
it to EP some time next week.

tony: We did have a look at trying to provide a segregated fit fix for
brisling to give EP something fast and useful in time. I wrote up a
proposal for "allocation caches" which is more general but could include
segregated fit for now. We discussed whether it was possible to do
something like that for brisling, but decided there wasn't enough time.
Probably needs a couple of weeks of development effort and a good week of
QA to bring it to fruition.

pekka: dtb was very understanding about this, but should there be a patch
release for ScriptWorks 5.1 (or even 5.0) in the near future, they would
like to have allocation caches in it. For the record this is more-or-less
the same thing that used to be called "manual allocation points".

tony: rit's got it today. Hope is we can do all the necessary QA and get it
out to EP on Monday or Tuesday next week.

rit: I've been looking at drj's development branch, and we found a couple
of bugs last week which he's fixed. So I'm hoping there won't be any more
major problems.

tony: Yes there isn't much slack.

daveb: What happens if we can't get it done in time?

tony: EP could use the old one. We'll lose Brownie points, of course.

daveb: What does brisling give them?

tony: A couple of bug fixes. Some performance improvements (not substantial).

rit: And possibly substantial performance improvements from the VM arena
work. Has anyone tested that yet?

pekka: No, but I'll be doing a simple test in a moment.


PLAN

tony: New version available from the usual place. Update isn't particularly
substantial. It more accurately reflects what we're up to.

pekka: brisling milestone is out by a week.

tony: Oh yes, I'll try and fix that. I thought I'd shrunk the QA effort by
a week, but that doesn't seem to have happened.

tony: I've also knocked up a java-prioritised version of the plan. (See web
page.) Main point is: by doing a less clean implementation, we could get
something out by the end of February. The main change is that we'd
previously anticipated doing some cleanups within MPS for the way different
ranks are supported. Here I'm suggesting we do something a little more
hacky, which is build support for the extra Java ranks directly into the
pool we'd be using for Java (i.e. AMC). That's milestone hack-jvm. We'd
then do the cleanup afterwards. The primary goal is to get something
working as soon as possible, and use it to push forward the marketing
effort.

drj: The task Get JVM comes well after hack JVM, which seems a bit wrong.

tony: Ah. I've ballsed up then. Haven't we done Get JVM by now anyway?

drj: No -- we've got Kaffe, but I think it's unusable. Get JVM means
getting the Sun JVM.

daveb: You can't do anything with Kaffe?

drj: Well, getting it to build at all was considerably painful...

daveb: What's involved in getting the Sun JVM?

drj: Getting a license, getting a lawyer to look at it, getting someone to
sign it, downloading it. License is available on the web. It's free. I have
a task (Arrange to Get JVM) for sorting it out and sending you the details.

daveb: Ok.

tony: I guess given that that dependency wasn't reflected, it looks as
though end of February was overoptimistic. I guess going through the
lawyers will take a few weeks.

drj,pekka: Depends. Who can say...

pekka: Given these other delays, might we have time to do the real thing
instead of the accelerated Java? The time taken to get the license is
rather unpredictable.

tony: I'll try and work out what the choices are -- what the window is
within which it makes sense to do it one way rather than the other.

pekka: Other things about the plan. I noticed that there's a milestone
Better Brisling....

tony: ... I haven't updated that yet. Perhaps the allocation cache should
go in it...

pekka: ... that's what I wanted to talk about. They really do want it, and
we need to keep ahead of the curve.

pekka: Looking at my plan. It claims that I've been working on segment
placement for a week in January, which isn't true. It's probably more true
to say I've been working on the first-fit pool, which is task 30. Although
the MVFF improvements have not been large, as we know. And the colour pool
definitely overran.

tony: Ok, I'll try and fix these. As I say, I haven't spent a great deal of
time working on the plan.

pekka: The process retrospective has got delayed till mid April, which is
quite unacceptable. It's understandable given that drj was on the critical
path for brisling, java and process retrospective. But I'm not sure it's
the right approach.

daveb: How many days are scheduled for that?

drj: Three weeks, of which I've done a week.

daveb: I suspect that may have to wait until after the JVM then, unless
someone else takes it on.

tony: ... or unless there's a delay waiting for the Sun license.

pekka: That would have to be a large delay.

tony: I'm sure there are other problems. If you see any, please tell me
verbally or send me some mail.


DARWIN RATINGS

daveb: I'll chase spring-support. I mailed them stuff about the Dylan
questionnaire, and they said they'd look at it.


WORK PRACTICES

pekka: A remark for the record, although drj won't have time to do anything
about it. We have a number of changes that were done for brisling, but
recorded as mps changes. We ended up doing those the wrong way round:
delaying and delaying and then noticing that they should be done. I found I
couldn't plan for all the changes when many of them were assigned (for
scheduling) to drj and tony.

tony: What changes are these?

pekka: The ones we did were X and X. I think there were a number of others
that we would have done if there'd been more time.

rit: Is the problem that because not all requests are assigned for
scheduling to a single person, it's hard for a single person to plan what's
going into a release.

pekka: Yes, that's a reasonable summary.

drj: Previously, everything went through Gavin.

tony: If we don't have one person taking overall responsibility, then we
need discussion. At the early stages of release planning, we need to
discuss what requests each of us think are important in that release.

pekka: Hmm. I think the problem is more managing the data than discussion.

tony: But discussion surely is essential...

<pause>

Meeting ended at about 12:20




