             NOTES FROM THE MM/PRODUCT MEETING, 1997-01-07
                       meeting.product.1997-01-07
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-01-07

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Clive Harris <cliveh>, and Jo Blishen 
<jblishen> met to define a strategy for a product based on MM technology.  
George Cleland <glc> joined later.


BACKGROUND

.bg: The document analysis.product describes a shrink-wrapped product which 
could have been produced during the year beginning in July 1996.  .bg.recruit: 
It relied on the recruitment of a developer for the graphical tools.  No 
developer was recruited.  Six months on it is hard to see how we can produce a 
product by the middle of 1997, as originally intended, and as requested by 
senior management.

.bg.ask: The original request and justification for a tools developer is in 
mail.richard.1996-06-14.15-38.  The need for a developer was flagged again in 
analysis.product.act.resource.tools.  The situation was raised in MM Quartet 
meetings (meeting.product.1996-06-27, meeting.product.1996-07-17, 
meeting.product.1996-08-29, meeting.product.1996-09-20, 
meeting.product.1996-10-07, meeting.product.1996-10-18, 
meeting.product.1996-11-01, and meeting.product.1996-12-09).

.bg.meet: Richard arranged two days of meetings (this is the second day) to 
reassess the situation and try to find a way forward.  Yesterday Richard and Jo 
discussed Product Management procedures.  Later Richard, Jo, and Clive 
discussed project status.


NOTES

Jo: Where are we?  What can we achieve in the external product, and by when?  
What and how do we tell senior management?

Richard: I don't believe it's possible for me to take on more developers in the 
next six months.

Jo: When I spoke to George he didn't seem to worry about the product deadline 
slipping.

Clive: We have a window of opportunity.  Jo [Marks] probably wants the product 
sooner rather than later for revenue reasons.  We should do something within a 
year.

Richard explains the situation with group management and technical leadership, 
and why it is that more developers now would lead to chaos in the Dylan and EP 
projects.  In the next six months we have an external release of the 
ScriptWorks RIP with MM and an external release of Dylan.  Apart from the 
pressure to get these right there is bound to be a fairly large shift in 
requirements after release and therefore we can't predict the release schedule 
and effort very far in to the future.

[George Cleland joins the meeting.]

George: We must absolutely not release a second class product.  We [senior 
management] recognize that we have been stretching things too widely and 
they're breaking down.  We need to concentrate on core revenue (EP, Dylan) 
etc.  Need to work out how we're going to get a solid plan (including 
recruitment) in place.

Jo: MM is dependent on Dylan and EP requirements, and they'll change.

George: Dylan is compiling itself and they'll start complaining about MM soon 
-- in the next few weeks and months.

Richard: I'm anticipating a lot of work on Dylan and some in EP.

Clive: It's important that Jo knows what the position is.

Richard: Taking someone on during the next six months, while this Dylan work is 
coming in, would be crazy.

Clive: The GUI is critical to this product, and needs to be developed 
iteratively if it's to be successful.

George: It's more important in the short and medium term to satisfy EP and 
Dylan as customers.  However, the MM product should be in sight.  How long is 
the window of opportunity?

Clive: We must ship in 1998.

George: Need revenue in the next financial year.

Jo: How will Jo react?

George: I think it'll be  OK.  I'm looking at staffing plan and may have a UI 
group across other groups sharing technology and implementing.  How long will 
tool development take?

Richard: I'm talking to Tucker next week to determine detailed design options 
and estimates.  I don't have any experience in estimating GUI development 
effort, though.

George: Talk to Luke about estimating.

Clive: Talk to Jill Peacegood about C++ windows development.

Richard: [Thinks hard for several minutes.] Rough estimate is 6 to 8 months 
from recruitment.  In fact, that's what I said in June/July 1996, so nothing's 
changed.  If it's six months before we get someone in then we've slipped a year 
and the product will be out in Q1 1998.

George: You're not going to get someone soon.  Things are tight.

Clive: What are our recruitment priorities.

George: I'll tell you at the end of this week.  We're working within a 
financial plan now.  HR is inefficient if spread too thinly.  We need someone 
with UI experience.  Incidentally, a new HCI person has just started -- 
Riccardo Teffarelo.  He's built some quite good tools and has won PC User 
awards.  He's based here.

Richard: It would be useful just to consult with him.

George: Jo, you should go to Glenn Bach and get some of his time.  Could 
legitimately ask for 15 to 20% of his time.  It's important that he spreads 
himself around, though EP2000 is very important.

Clive: When will the first EP2000 products start emerging?

George: This year.  It's imperative.

Jo: How shall we talk to Jo?

George: I will talk to him about it.

Jo: I want to change what's written in the product schedules database.

Richard: I will produce a better estimate after I've talked to Tucker next week.

[Meeting adjourns and Richard talk to Jo about tool design options.]


ACTIONS

.act.riccardo: Jo will negotiate some of Ricardo Teffarelo's time from Glen 
Bach.

.act.luke: Richard will talk to Luke about estimating GUI development effort.

.act.jill: Ditto Jill Peacegood.

.act.design: Richard will work with Tucker to get detailed tool design and work 
estimates.

.act.inform: George will inform Jo Marks of the situation with MM.

