                   MEETING ABOUT MM/DYLAN SCHEDULING
                       meeting.general.1998-07-06
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1998-07-06

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Tony Mann, David Jones, and Gavin Matthews met briefly to discuss 
MM/Dylan scheduling, specifically release.dylan.crow.


DATES

.date: Originally release.dylan.crow was scheduled to be shipped to Dylan on 
1998-07-17 Friday.  Tony believes that Dylan have slipped their schedule by at 
least a week, and won't be in a position to use release.dylan.crow by that 
stage.  Gavin proposed a QA ship date of 1998-07-17 Friday and a Dylan ship 
date of 1998-07-24 Friday.  Tony will check that this is alright with Dylan.


MAIN TASKS

.main: There are three main areas of work for release.dylan.crow.

.low-mem: The low memory interface (reservoir fund) is in place.  We have a 
clear idea how to implement it.  This should take Tony around a week, and is 
low risk.
  request.dylan.170087: req.dylan(5).prot.fail-alloc

.pig: The pig interface (ramp allocation) is in place.  We don't have such a 
clear idea about how to implement it.  We proposed to have a design discussion 
later today.  We should be able to get something useful implemented in a week, 
but this is high risk.
  request.dylan.170423: req.dylan(6).attr.control -- Dylan has no control over 
collection strategy

.ext-arena: Extensible arenas have been much discussed, but we still don't have 
a detailed design.  David is on the point of releasing a sketch of the design.  
David estimates that it will take him around 5 weeks to produce an extensible 
arena implementation that has a fully discussed design.  After some discussion, 
it was agreed that something plausible could be implemented in around two 
weeks; if this design was later disagreed with, the cost of this approach will 
be somewhat less that the two man-weeks invested.
  request.dylan.160065: VM Arena cannot start with a small reserved address 
space and expand
  request.dylan.170029: Dylan Memory Manager does not meet 
req.dylan(5).attr.obj.max
  request.dylan.170057: req.dylan(5).dc.env.self: Must work with other 
instances of itself
  request.dylan.170028: req.dylan(5).attr.capacity (no limit on amount that can 
be allocated)


OTHER IMPORTANT TASKS

.160098: change.dylan.crow.160098 is an important bug fix.  It has a "quick 
fix" and a "right thing".  It was agreed that Gavin would port DRJ's "quick 
fix" from the blackbird branch, and schedule the "right thing" for 
release.dylan.dove.
  request.dylan.160098: Buffer condemnation implementation is not thread-safe

.160094: change.dylan.crow.160094 is an important bug fix currently assign to 
David.  Gavin will take on this task of porting David's fix from the blackbird 
branch.
  request.dylan.160094: MPS assertion failure when running rit-weak-test.

.170322: change.dylan.crow.170322 is now approving, and shouldn't be a problem.
  request.dylan.170322: MM refuses allocation (repeatedly) although live 
objects are not too large


BUMPABLE

.bump: The following requests scheduled for release.dylan.crow were identified 
as non-urgent and hence bumpable:
  request.dylan.170551: variety.hi is too slow compared to variety.wi
  request.dylan.170573: DMM Telemetry cannot easily be filtered in the MPS
  request.dylan.160008: MM Development cannot use telemetry-driven graphical 
tools
  request.dylan.170560: Dylan memory manager may assert if memory is exhausted
  request.dylan.170577: DMM cannot be performance-metered against specific 
applications
  request.dylan.170312: MM aborts when dylan compiler recompiles same file in 
different session
  request.dylan.160033: QA cannot determine when the memory manager is doing 
work
  request.dylan.160016: DMM AVERs if SEH is passed address -1
  request.dylan.170554: Dylan cannot tell how many bytes have been consed to 
date

