                       MM QUARTET MEETING MINUTES
                       meeting.quartet.1997-01-21
                               draft doc
                          jblishen 1997-01-21

Attended by Richard <richard>, Jo <jblishen> and Mark <mwp>.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.report: Richard will restart weekly progress reporting.

.act.riccardo: Jo will negotiate some of Ricardo Teffarelo's time from
Glen Bach.

Jo was waiting for firmer plans to come from Richard.  Richard would like to 
talk
to him soon - Jo will do this action.

.act.luke: Richard will talk to Luke about estimating GUI development effort.

.act.gill: Ditto Gill Peacegood.


MINUTES 

Summary of Richard's meetings at 1CC

Richard had three main meetings.

1) 3 days with Tucker.  Elaborated design of tool.  Made estimates for schedule 
and resource required.  50-60% confidence in estimates.  4 stage design: 
prototype (2 weeks); basis of simple tool reengineered with UI (24 weeks); 
further features (28 weeks).  Designs planned for future releases: live 
connection; better UI for configuration.  The estimates are based on using C++, 
Windows, confident developer with no ramp-up.  Could split it amongst 2 
developers.  More details are in meeting.general.1997-01-10

2) Doc effort started.  Contact with Leah.  2 days detailed technical 
communication with Leah.  6-8 months of doc effort.  Leah will produce more 
detailed estimates when she has produced outlines within next month.  Leah will 
be in Cambridge in early March.  Will have outlines and estimates by then.

3) MM book discussed with Sonya Keene and Tucker and Andrew Shires.  The book 
is not specific to this product.  How to make good use of gc and mm.  Java, 
Lisp, Dylan programmers are target.  Ship book with product or product with 
book.  Filters out some stuff that might have to be in the user doc.  Jo has 
reservations about the group taking on more projects.  Richard feels it won't 
have detrimental impact on the group.  Tucker and Andrew to work on it.  Leah 
involved on the outline.  .book.ok: Quartet
says OK.


New machine may be required (shared with QA)

The plan is to tie in tool development with David's work on Dylan.  Use some 
prototype designs and work with Dylan.  Need to run a LispWorks image to run 
Dylan.  May need a new machine: a Unix box.  Also Richard Tucker needs one to 
QA Dylan/MM.  UltraSparc, new generation SGI?  He'll need a PC in the future 
too for Dylan.  Richard will coordinate requirements from MM group and Mark 
will do so for QA.

Product Specs and Schedules release dates

Current MM product release date estimate is now in the database.  Jo and 
Richard will produce a product plan during the meeting at the end of the week 
which will firm up the date.

Web page launch today

It is happening today.  No further major development planned on the Web pages.  
Maintenance phase is now being entered.  .web.ok: Quartet says OK.

MM/EPCore

PDF input required in SW v4.5.  Andy Cave needs new pool classes.  v4.5 is on a 
very tight schedule: demo at Seybold April 22 and ship to external customers a 
month later.  Richard to speak to Andy to get detailed technical requirements 
to see what schedule and functionality we can ship to them.

MM/Dylan

Dylan incremental release in next few weeks which has the development env and 
compiler under Windows.  Interactive release needed for a ObjectWorldEast in 
March.  Another release in June at ObjectExpo.  We could consider DUIM for 
Windows implementation.  Tucker could work on DUIM if he had a PC.  Mac/PC 
combo may be the best solution.  Richard and Tucker to investigate the state of 
DUIM for use in the MM product.

ACTIONS

.act.machine: Richard and Mark will work out requirements for possible new 
machine.

.act.plan: Jo and Richard to produce a MM product plan.

.act.andy: Richard will talk to Andy Cave about EP's MM requirements for the 
4.5 release.

.act.duim: Richard and Tucker will investigate the state of DUIM for the MM 
product.


