              NOTES FROM GENERAL GROUP MEETING, 1997-02-26
                      meeting.general.1997-02-26.2
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-02-26

Who: Richard, NickB, DRJ, GavinM, PTW

RICHARD

Richard: I've been getting into using Darwin a bit more.  Things haven't been 
running smoothly between Jo and me, because it's not clear who's doing what.  I 
seem to being the Product Management for the moment.  It's getting resolved by 
higher management.

We need to look at Darwin assignments every morning and plan time accordingly.  
More later.

I'd like to sort out the next trip.  Either Tucker comes here or one or two 
people go to the US.  It depend on the event logging a bit.

Apart from the Quartet meeting etc., I've been getting on with the tracer 
work.  I've made some good simplifications to the AMC pool.  In 2-3 weeks we'll 
have more control over generation.

We have the Dylan plan.  The compiler is bootstrapped, but doesn't execute.  
Things are moving quickly and we need to support them.  Need Windows 95, weak 
tables, debugger support (need MPS to interract with debugger).  Later need 
performance and other tools.


DAVID <DRJ>

DRJ: Spent a lot of time on mail.  Also Fix interface and how it interacts with 
finalization.  Also worked with Windows 95, time spent installing it.  

Richard: Job switch came from planning.  Finalization is not so important at 
the moment.  Started to test 4DRC.  Need to evaluate that.  action

DRJ: Changing fix interface and messaging things are all that's needed for 
finalization.


NICK <NickB>

NickB: Been ill.  Done trapping release for EPCORE.  Talked about exploring in 
Dylan.  I regret ever agreeing to do mm work for Core RIP because it's 
horrible.  Building SW is horrible.  Change control is horrible.  Can't get 
reliable checkout just by checking out.  Hopefully all these problems will go 
away shortly.  Eveything outside the MPS will cease to be our responsibilty.  
Once they commit to the new interface.  

Richard: Might take this up again with EP management.  We have the same trouble 
with Dylan.  They aren't ready to ship.  SW is only ready to ship once a month 
or so.

NickB: A month-old copy is no good for performance testing. 

Performance is now comparable, but low memory is different.  They use free 
estimate to determine what to do.  Sometimes it's better, but on other jobs the 
memory isn't reclaimed properly at the end of the job.  MPSpanPoolSegments 
interaction?

Richard: Bear in mind that we want to write custom pools at some point.

NickB: I've considered throwing away MV and using something else.

Richard: We could have a DL pool (display lists?), but MV wants improving 
anyway.


TUCKER <PTW>

PTW: Symbolics came back.  Sharon wanted to know whether we were charging them.

Spent time being a pest about finalization design for Dylan.

Richard: Your observation about how Andrew was doing design was good.

PTW: Design was in response to trying to document non-design.

Richard: We'll find this with Leah documenting the MPS, but it should be 
smoother.

PTW: Reviewed my "non-design" and have a whole boat-load of edits.

Yehouda was over.  Discussed ideas about book.  He was inquisitive about what 
MM was doing.  He was unaware that we had any other product apart from Dylan, 
about SW and external product.  He seemed peeved that we hadn't talked to him 
more; resident GC expert that we never approach.

Richard: I'll do something about that.  action

PTW: He's skeptical that we can write a good book about using GC.

Richard: His attitude is that you can't fix dumb users, you simply have to fix 
the GC.

PTW: I explained that we could explain what GC is and give them some model to 
work with, anecdotal.

Richard: More helpful top-down, talking at the high-level about what can affect 
the GC.

PTW: In order to do any programming, the user has to have some model of what 
normal behaviour is.

NickB: When RIT was first here, he was running AMCSS, and he kept getting 
SEGV's.  This was correct behaviour.

PTW: kneejerk reaction with Symbolics debugger is to ignore floating point.

Still trying to use the Richard Brooksby mail management system.  Emptying my 
inbox shouldn't take till the end of the day.

Richard: Unless you can deal with a message in less than a minute, 20 seconds, 
then you put it into a different box. 


GAVINM

GavinM: Events but distracted.  Two angry Web mails.  Got surprisingly far with 
Doc rules.

Richard: Provoke doc group process.

GavinM: Not doing well with mail.

Richard: Need to deals with things faster.

I can say accurately how long it takes me to deal with all the boxes.

GavinM: Still sucking up a lot of time.

Richard: Still set aside time and prioritize.

GavinM: It's as if anything in mail which can be dealt with relatively quickly 
gets top priority.

Richard: You can be very reactive but not get any medium or long-term work done.

PTW,DRJ: General problem.

PTW: We're very e-mail driven.

GavinM: It's the same time, surely, and you don't need to re-read.

Setting up filters has increased my unit cost.

Richard: Important to plan your time, and put important things first.

DRJ: Danger with latter approach is that I stick things in my Important folder 
and never look at them.

Richard: Need second half of process.  I have calender events for "Deal with 30 
important messages".  People get bunch of replies to old mail.  I can't be 
highly responsive.

GavinM: Unsatisfactory to be unresponsive, e.g. for design discussion.

Richard: I deal with all urgent message in a day.  Must not let it pile up.

GavinM: Still not getting the hang of the system.  Backlog is part of the 
problem.

Richard: Sometimes have to be ruthless and drop other issues.

GavinM: also briefed AndrewS on review.  It was interesting to hear his 
response.  I think he liked it but it was hard to tell.  He was interested in 
the fact that there's no procedure for being informed about rejection or 
objecting to it.


TRIPS

Richard: Tucker, David, and Gavin need to get together about events.


EVENTS

Richard: What we need to do it to make progress on the tool by trying out new 
things.  Dylan prototype.  Problems from Johnathon.  How could we use the tool 
or other types of tool to fix them.  Bloat, bad references, connectivity on 
heap.  If we want to know the path form the root to an object, then we just 
need to look at the fixes.  

GavinM: Three aspects to design: Event types, interface, file format.

PTW: Need to concentrate on Fix events.  

Richard: It would be nice to write design stuff up, but we're not sure what we 
need.  

GavinM: Choice between requirements analysis and hacking around.

DRJ: Requirement is reduced image size.  Need to find what works and what 
doesn't.

Richard: Let's update the designs and get something running.

GavinM: If I can stop my mornings getting sucked in, I can get stuff out in a 
couple of weeks.

[NickB goes.]

Richard: Should have stuff out when Tucker comes back.

How's DYlan going?

DRJ: SHould have stuff for next release.

Richard: Semblence of real release schedule in Darwin.

DRJ: None say "must emit events".  When it gets into trunk.

Richard: Say by SunFLower 1997-05-03.

DRJ: New interface on Buffalo 1997-03-13.  Only need to relink after that.

Richard: INteraface change for events, interning.

GavinM: Just an interface addition, doesn't cause incompatability.

Richard: I need to think about this a bit more.  action

Decent event output by mid April.

PTW: How are we going to say what an object is?

Richard: need a version of Nick's explorer.  Need something like this in the 
short term.  Find out from that what we can do in the longer term to be more 
qualative.

DRJ: If it's live, then we can do debugging.

PTW: Don't have any way of communicating any more information.

Richard: Need interactive system as well.  

GavinM: Interactive telemetry will be somewhat later.

Richard: Need something quick and dirty for Dylan.  

GavinM: It's not clear that interactivity is a requirement.  Can be satisfied 
by MPS C interface functions to answer queries.

Richard: I thought that we could have events emitted and fucntion questions 
push-pull.  E.g. telnet, tool talking to MPS.  

PTW: Already have two-way because log is turned on or off.  Like debugger.  

Richard: Channel doesn't just carry events.  

GavinM: Still two things, questions and turning on and off watches.

Richard: [push-pull terminology]

Communication channel can carry several things, such as events, and an 
interactive channel than can discuss things, like explorer.  Abstracting, you 
can have protocol for asking question alongside event stream.

GavinM: They're not inextricably linked.

Richard:

 - I/O Architecture Diagram 2 

PTW: One thing about function calls, is what do you do with a core dump, or at 
a remote site.

[...]

Richard: Returning to Tucker's core dump idea, can we deal with them in the 
same in the way.  

PTW: I/O interface doesn't need to lie with the running program.  We can 
replicate it on a corpse.  

Richard: [More diagrams] Necromancer has corpse.  Or pathologist.  Coroner.  
Medium.  It's able to answer questions that you would otherwise have put to the 
MPM.  

[NickB rejoins.]

GavinM: This is an important requirement that we need to take into account when 
designing the interface.  

PTW: Symbolics tool has peeks and poke through the I/O interface.  Worked on 
files.

NickB: There'll need to be a non-portable layer in the medium.

GavinM: What do you need to know?  You need to be able to look at managed 
memory. 

PTW: And object format.

And undumped events.

NickB: And consistency check on MM datastructures.

PTW: And on objects.  Depends on redundant information.

NickB: There is some in Dylan.

PTW: Sometimes end up scanning raw memory in search of clues.  Wrapper 
pointers, signatures.

Richard: Implies we need more introspection in MPM, to understand own 
datastructures.   

PTW: Might be on a different machine.

Richard: Having agreed that this is feasible, let's shelve it.

PTW: Could map live system into same arrangement.  Medium could be thin.

Richard: Could always have medium there.  

GavinM: Just tramping over memory.

NickB: Just where the information is.  Abstract peek and poke.

Richard: Could save redundancy.  

We failed to decide an objective for this meeting, so we haven't.  Let's get 
together again soon.  Friday?  14:00 UTC

Also want Tucker to back-propagate requirements for book.  Ten most important 
things come across.  Need to start writing things up.



ATTACHMENT
   "O Architecture Diagram 2"

