      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-06-27
                       meeting.product.1996-06-27
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-06-27

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Alex Parnes, Clive Harris, Richard Brooksby, Mark Preece, and Ken 
Jackson met on 1996-06-27 to discuss the progress of the memory management 
products.


BUSINESS MODEL

Alex asked that the issue of the business model for MM Products be resolved.  
Clive and Richard introduced the product proposal document (analysis.product) 
which includes discussion of the OEM business model and its relationship to the 
Shrink-Wrapped product (see analysis.product.prod.oem.*).

Alex remarked that this wasn't the model that he had in mind, where an OEM 
solution would mature the MPS development towards a Shrink-Wrapped product.

Richard described how the model presented in analysis.product worked both ways:

  - approaching a new OEM and deploying the MPS as an initial solution;

  - a customer who has deployed the MPS comes to Harlequin for further 
development.

All present were in agreement with this business model.


RESOURCES

Four resources are required:

  - documentor,
  - QA person,
  - tool developer,
  - product manager.

These are noted in the product analysis and proposal 
(analysis.product.act.resource.*).

ACTION: Alex has some descriptions of QA candidates which he will forward to 
Mark and Richard.

ACTION: Mark and Richard will assess the suitability of these candidates.

Mark is over in the UK on the 16th of next month.


PROPOSAL DOCUMENT

The product analysis and proposal document (analysis.product) will be formatted 
in Microsoft Word by Clive and distributed.

Alex will forward this document to Sang, Jo, and George Cleland with a cover 
note concerning resources.


USABILITY ANALYSIS

Alex asked about the progress of the usability analysis.  Richard said that Rod 
had conducted some interviews within Harlequin and was writing up.

Richard said that he was trying to find more input for Rod, possibly drawing on 
the Manchester Computing Centre or LFCS.

Alex expressed worried about the leaking of trade secrets or other information 
via this route.  He requested that Clive be present at any interviews.

Clive agreed, and said that he wanted to go anyway to find out how it is done.

Richard assured Alex that the MM Group was concerned about secrecy, and that 
any consultation with outside groups would be approved by George Cleland.  Alex 
declared that he trusted George's judgement on such matters.

Richard also suggested that if anyone was concerned about secrecy they should 
read overview.ideas.

Alex asked about Rod's role.  Richard said that he had defined Rod's role as 
bridging the gap between our market requirements and the tool, documentation, 
and product design, by applying usability analysis.

Alex asked if this was really in line with the definition of "usability 
analysis".  Richard said that Rod thought it was.


EP PROGRESS

Alex asked about EP progress.  Richard stated that the "evaluation" (i.e. 
feasibility) release was essentially complete, and that things were going well, 
in general.

Richard clarified the QA situation with respect to this release for Alex.


WEB PAGES

Clive described the memory management web page initiative.  Some discussion 
followed.


ACTIONS

.act.proposal: All present to read and review the product analysis and proposal 
document (analysis.product).

.act.wordify: Clive to format the product analysis and proposal document in 
Microsoft Word for digestion by senior management.

.act.forward: Alex to forward the formatted product analysis and proposal 
document with a cover note about resources.

.act.fax: Alex to fax descriptions of QA candidates to Richard.

.act.qa: Richard and Mark to assess QA candidates.

.act.interview: Clive to contact Rod and participate in any interviews with 
external people.

.act.pm: Clive and Richard to add a note about the need for a Product Manager 
to the product analysis and proposal document.


NEXT MEETING

The next meeting will be on 1996-07-17 at 16:00 BST/11:00 EDT.

