                        GUIDE FOR QUOTING DATES
                               guide.date
                            incomplete guide
                             drj 1996-09-27

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document is a guide to quoting dates in a precise and easily 
understood format.
[add justification, otherwise people will think we are looneys.  drj 1998-12-11]

.readership: Anyone, particularly anyone wishing to discuss dates and times 
with the MM group.

.source: There is an explanation of ISO8601 available.
.source.not: Note that the actual ISO standard _was not_ used as a source.  
However, there's no particular reason not to believe the above PS paper.  [The 
standard still wasn't used as a source even though it's now available -- drj 
1998-01-13]

.source.standard: ISO have made ISO 8601:1998(E) available.  See 
standard.iso8601.1988e(0) where you can find the PDF.


GUIDELINES

.iso.date: Wherever possible quote dates in ISO format using full precision and 
including separators (the "extended format" of subcluse 5.2.2.1 of ISO 
8601:1988).  That is in the form 1996-09-27.

.weekday: It is often useful and convenient to name the week day of the date 
that is being discussed.  Take care to ensure that the date and the weekday do 
in fact correspond, otherwise it will be confusing and ambiguous.

.iso.time: Where a time is needed as well append it to the date (with a single 
space in between).  The time should be of the form HH:MM or HH:MM:SS.  It is 
rarely necessary to use seconds.  The hours should be given using a 24-hour 
clock.  ISO 8601 requires a "T" separator between the date and the time, but we 
do not use this.

.time.zone: If it is not clear from context (in practice it rarely is) then 
append timezone information to the time.

.time.zone.mix: If you feel that it is necessary to quote the same time in two 
different time-zones then be extremely careful.  It is very easy to 
miscalculate the time and the zone offsets which will lead to confusion and 
ambiguity.  Especial care should be taken when it is close to the usual dates 
for daylight-saving changeover as timezones may differ by more or less than the 
usual amount.


EXAMPLES

.example: Some complete examples:

.example.convene:
We need to discuss our stance with regards to the Foo project suggestion.  
Would everyone be available for a meeting on Thursday morning at 10, that is 
1907-08-08 10:00 (British Summer Time)?

.example.historical:
My dog died 10 years ago today (1986-09-27), cakes in the kitchen at 3.

ATTACHMENT
   "Iso8601.ps"

