              TRANSCRIPT OF IRC CHANNEL #MM ON 1997-05-23
                           irc.mm.1997-05-23
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-05-27

.drj.09-22-34: morning all

.gavinm.11-56-01: Morning

.gavinm.12-55-34: Hello tucker.

.richard.12-56-21: Hello Tucker.

.richard.12-56-33: I have discovered PopupFolder.  I don't think I can live 
without it.

.ptw.12-57-35: Have had it for long time.  I thought I showed it to you.  Yes, 
it is great.  I believe it is in MacOS 8 (as "spring-loaded" folders).  Another 
shareware idea absorbed...

.richard.12-58-25: You did show me, but I hadn't tried it until now.

.richard.12-58-36: I especially like being able to drop something on an item in 
the menu.

.richard.12-58-50: I don't like the Mac OS 8 implementation as much, in fact.

.ptw.13-00-57: I also like being able to "grab" something from a deeply nested 
folder.

.ptw.13-01-09: I don't know how the 8 folders work

.gavinm.13-01-36: What is PopupFolder?

.ptw.13-02-35: It really gripes me that D&D is implemented in "PC" fashion -- 
as a veneer of shinola -- resulting in lot's of "intuitive" uses not working... 

.richard.13-06-53: D&D?

.richard.13-08-05: shinola?

.richard.13-08-20: ACTION is trying to make his tamagotchi happy

.richard.13-08-30: Damn thing woke me up at 11:30 last night.

.ptw.13-08-41: D&D == drag 'n' drop

.richard.13-09-54: Ah, I see.  Apple events similarly.

.richard.13-13-30: Tucker, we have a performance review at 15:00 (i.e in 45 
mins).

.ptw.13-16-01: Shinola == brand of shoe polish occasionally confused with 
excrement as in:  "He doesn't know sh*t from ..."

.gavinm.13-16-42: What puzzles me more is arse-elbow confusion.

.gavinm.13-17-14: For example, most motorbike accidents involve learners 
because they don't know their arse from their elbow.

.gavinm.13-17-38: I agree that this confusion might result in a rather odd 
riding posture, but it's not one I've ever observed.

.ptw.13-20-05: Interesting that either confusion might result in you being 
blackened incorrectly -- hence it's relevance to MM ;-)

.gavinm.13-32-34: (Richard) I've not gone home -- I just crashed.  PopupFolder 
crashed, in fact.  Ho hum.  Not so cool after all.

.ptw.13-37-01: What did you do to make it crash?

.richard.13-37-40: Looked at Control Panels under the Apple Menu.  It was too 
long to fit on the screen.  It crashed when it should've started to scroll.

.ptw.13-37-54: How did IRC manage to squirt out a signoff if you crashed?

.richard.13-37-58: I believe my System Heap was nearly full, however.

.gavinm.13-38-52: This must be Friday; I can't get my inbox empty.

.ptw.13-39-07: Ah, I do not let PUF handle my apple menu.  A: I don't like the 
font there.  B: It is not Kaleidoscope-friendly

.ptw.13-39-39: (Don't tell anyone that Kaleidoscope is _really_ why my Duo is 
too slow ;-).

.gavinm.13-41-31: What's Kaleidoscope?

.gavinm.13-41-48: And since when could I drag-and-drop text in NT?

.gavinm.13-54-19: PTW, I don't mean to be the process martinet, but I can't 
help noticing that change.web.trapdoor.170235 (cactus stack has no definition) 
is still at Waiting.

.ptw.13-56-29: I sent mail last night with the initial definition.  Do I need 
to do more?

.ptw.13-56-56: I want to revised .stack, but have been thwarted by  
distractions.

.ptw.13-57-15: I don't believe I can finish .threatening-boundary by your 
deadline.

.ptw.13-58-44: Kaleidoscope: www.seagull.net/kaleidoscope waste cpu cycles on 
window dressing

.gavinm.14-02-32: More on the deadline RSN.

.gavinm.14-03-20: Regarding MM Evolution: Assignments have 6 statuses: Waiting; 
Implementing; Releasing; Approving; Complete; Reworking.

.gavinm.14-03-51: Implementing means that some development work has been 
started on the assignment.

.gavinm.14-04-54: Releasing means that the working source has started to be 
modified by the assignment.  This is particularly important, because the 
product manager uses this to determine whether changes can be rescheduled to a 
later release.

.ptw.14-05-08: Are you asking me to adjust change.web.trapdoor.170235?

.gavinm.14-05-17: Approving is where the assignment is finished and checked 
into the working source.

.gavinm.14-06-01: If it's not accurate, then yes.

.ptw.14-18-59: I have no idea how to do that.

.ptw.14-21-29: What became of R?  We had a performance review scheduled for 
14:00

.gavinm.14-21-49: Ah.  A t some point I ought to be sending you a paper copy of 
the procedures, but in the meantime, have you had a look at proc.darwin and 
process.darwin?

.gavinm.14-25-19: Here he is now.

.ptw.14-26-05: We should try rescheduling using MMXP

.ptw.14-26-27: I don't know how I get my server to talk to your server, yet.

.ptw.14-26-35: Gavin, did you look at it at all?

.richard.14-27-13: Gavin is out of the room.

.richard.14-27-22: Here he comes...

.gavinm.14-27-39: Not yet.

.ptw.14-28-40: It has a nice feature of being able to show all the schedules of 
everyone in the group at once (blanking out any private appointments they have) 
so that you can easily pick a time to schedule a group meeting.

.ptw.14-29-14: It only takes about 15 minutes to setup.  It forces you to 
reboot when you install the server, but not the client.

.gavinm.14-29-36: I'm intsalling it now.

.ptw.14-37-10: Hm.  If you install it on a dynamic Mac, I suspect you'll have 
to look for my server, not vice-versa.  In theory, you should be able to see my 
server at myteline.harlequin.com

.gavinm.14-37-28: Why do I need to create a server?  Surely we should all use 
the same one?

.ptw.14-38-30: Surely, but you probably don't want to use mine, which will be 
offline a lot.

.ptw.14-38-45: But I _will_ want to use mine, since it will never be off-line 
to me.

.ptw.14-39-03: There is something about "hubs" I haven't studied yet.

.gavinm.14-39-06: Er, true.  Presumably the servers can exchange info,

.gavinm.14-39-31: so if we have an "always online server", we can interchange 
through it.

.ptw.14-40-07: right

.gavinm.14-40-16: I think it's had at least 15 minutes and it isn't installed 
yet.

.gavinm.14-41-09: Er, no.  I started installing it at 14:29 GMT.

.ptw.14-41-25: It has been 11 minutes since you said you started...

.gavinm.14-45-01: Ok.  It's running.  How do I look at your server?

.ptw.14-49-33: I don't know.  My server is at myteline.harlequin.com, somewhere 
there is a thing to select your server and you can pick TCP or AppleTalk.  Pick 
TCP and name my server, I guess.

.gavinm.14-49-59: There's something under proxies, but I can only see me.

.ptw.14-50-33: No proxies are "secretaries" -- someone who manages your 
schedule.

.gavinm.14-51-16: Ah.  Got it.

.gavinm.14-51-52: I can only see me under IP/Network Wide.

.ptw.14-52-38: Right.  I think you have to add myteline manually.  There is no 
broadcast of servers over IP.

.ptw.14-52-46: What is your machine?

.gavinm.14-55-08: McSherlock

.gavinm.14-55-43: I tried addign it manually, as myteline.harlequin.com, and as 
an IP address.

.ptw.14-59-49: I mean what is your machine's IP?

.ptw.15-00-31: ACTION goes downstairs

.gavinm.15-01-13: 193.128.93.144

.ptw.15-08-38: ACTION is back

.ptw.15-09-24: I set up a"hub" on my server.  Can you see that maybe?  (You go 
to the Admin program)

.gavinm.15-10-30: I seem to have attached to a hub.  I don't know if it's yours.

.ptw.15-12-50: Unless you set one up, I would assume it is mine.  I don't know 
how to tell if you are attached...

.ptw.15-13-40: Aha!  You are in my address book.  I guess you are attached!

.richard.15-14-21: ACTION hums to himself

.richard.15-14-30: ACTION checks up on his tamagotchi

.richard.15-14-52: What should I call it?

.ptw.15-15-55: Try looking at the master schedule for the memory management 
group...

.ptw.15-20-04: tamagotchi: either email or irc

.gavinm.15-20-46: Nope.  No master schedules.

.gavinm.15-21-21: Let's go thorugh this again.  I'm connected to my server.  My 
server should be connected to you hub.  Right?

.ptw.15-21-46: Well, that's one way.

.ptw.15-21-59: I can see you, so it must be working after a fashion

.ptw.15-22-07: Can you see me in your address book?

.ptw.15-22-25: Probably, the Hub should be on an always up machine and I should 
connect to it.

.gavinm.15-22-39: Yes.  I can see three Withingtons.

.ptw.15-22-40: I can also see your server, and could connect to it if you gave 
me an account.

.ptw.15-22-58: It seems Hubs will mirror accounts of any servers attached.

.ptw.15-23-16: Hm, I wonder if I want all of Hqn to see what is going on at 
Spoon Hill?

.ptw.15-23-34: Perhaps there is a way to say which accounts go to hubs...

.ptw.15-23-56: Did you get a message from me to join a meeting?

.ptw.15-24-14: I guess you just sent a reply, my doorbell rang.

.gavinm.15-24-28: I just sent you a meeting proposal.  I think.

.ptw.15-25-03: Right.  Why did it let you ask?  Aren't I busy then?

.gavinm.15-25-17: Yes.  It told me that.

.gavinm.15-25-26: But I sent it anyway.

.drj.15-26-12: can anyone hear this?

.ptw.15-26-16: right, and I'm about to get busy

.drj.15-26-19: hitamago

.ptw.15-26-41: ?

.drj.15-27-01: hot egg

.drj.15-27-28: tamagotchi means lovable egg apparently.  We suspect that "tchi" 
is some sort of diminutive

.drj.15-27-38: so its more likely to be literally "eggikins"

.drj.15-27-56: er, firefy egg, actually, not hot.

.ptw.15-28-21: master schedules: I created two groups, perhaps they don't 
propagate...

.richard.15-28-37: Tucker, we haven't seen any book text from you this week.

.ptw.15-29-48: Is that a subtle way of saying "quite faffing around with Gavin"?

.ptw.15-30-07: You may not see it 'til Monday

.richard.15-31-46: Faff about all you like, but make progress too!

.ptw.15-33-05: I progressed on all but one glossary entry...

.richard.15-33-21: More that me.

.ptw.15-33-40: ACTION is late

.gavinm.16-28-44: I don't think much of MacLynx.  It's very slow, and I can't 
easily open local files.

.richard.16-31-33: Write to the author about it.

.richard.16-31-37: It's just a beta.

.drj.17-13-31: you can't open local files easily?

.drj.17-13-38: can you not just go...

.drj.17-13-44: gdesktop:foobar.html

.drj.17-13-49: ? or whatever?

.gavinm.17-18-56: When I said "easy", I though there might be something other 
than working out the absolute path.

.gavinm.18-22-42: Good night; See y'all on Tuesday.

