           NOTES FROM THE INITIAL MM/BOOK MEETING, 1997-01-16
                        meeting.book.1997-01-16
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-01-16

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> and Tucker Withington <ptw> met Sonya Keene 
<skeene> and Andrew Shires <andrews> to discuss the potential MM/Book project.


NOTES

Sonya: Places for more work: title.  Prospectus is a sales tool, fine not to 
know the title but it's the one phrase that defines the book.  Collect 
alternate titles which might grab the publisher more.

ptw: "Programming effectively with GC" conveys it, but it's wordy.  "Effective 
GC" is too cryptic.

Sonya: The editor may suggest a better title, but we must sell to him.

Andrew: I like "Programming Effectively with GC"

Sonya: We'd like to be more open with Peter Gordon about plans for the MM 
product.  It'd be good to have something specific to go on the CD.  Sometimes 
that sells the book.  Richard, can you get a statement of the product and 
plans?  Don't need details, but some overview.

ptw: I'd like the book to be an adjunct to the product, so Richard has to get 
permission from the Quartet to mention that we have a product.  We might just 
tell Addison-Wesley that it's a secret.

Sonya: When we send the prospectus he'll send it out to other people, to get 
opinions.  We can't really put secrets in the prospectus.

ptw: Maybe we can go to the Quartet and put the case for disclosure of the 
product plans.  We'd like a demo product on the CD.

Richard: I'll get on to the Quartet.  [.act.prod]

Sonya: Could you identify the competitors so that Peter won't send it on to 
them.  Next step is to beef up prospectus and make an outline.  Dylan outline 
wasn't good.  Could be just a one page thing listing chapters in order.

ptw: In the web book we list the number of pages.

Sonya: That was a tool for me really.  It can help estimate the schedule.

ptw: We'll have to write something at the level of the Dylan outline to make 
estimates, but then cut it down.

Sonya: Do you know how you're going to write the book?

ptw: I have [this] as an outline.  Andrew and I have tossed it around.  Maybe 
the introductory chapters can be worked on by Andrew now.  We're working on the 
introduction for the web pages, so maybe some of that material can be useful.

Sonya: I didn't find that for the web book.

Sonya: Ken and I think that the book needs to be separated from the product 
documentation and web pages.  One is issue of ownership of material.  
Addison-Wesley want to own it and publish it first.  O'Reilly wouldn't mind, 
but Addison-Wesley won't want their thunder stolen.  The book can't be an 
advert for the product, so we can't have product documentation duplicated in 
the book.

If the book leads the product then Addison-Wesley would have to give us 
_permission_ to use material.  Addison-Wesley will own rights, and we can 
request permission to duplicate it in product doc.  We can ship the book with 
the product.  If we guarantee to buy copies it makes a lot of difference.  It'd 
be great to promise to do that.

Richard: We'd like to use code developed for the book.

ptw: We can ship the book with examples with the product.  Can we commit to 
doing that -- it would make things easier.  The book could cost about $10 to 
add to the product.

Sonya: Once you've bought 1500 copies at $10 it might rise to $20.

Richard: [Lots of discussion of crossover between book and doc.  Essentially, 
crossover is a big justification for putting effort into the book.  Richard put 
pressure on Sonya to allow more crossover, provided that material isn't 
duplicated.  It was agreed to allow discussion of the book and doc outlines to 
mix, so that the doc can anticipate and make use of the book.]

Sonya: Should use design similar to Dylan book and Web book.  Should mention 
that the product is targetted at C++ programmers.

Richard: 50% of Tucker's time is realistic if the book is accepted by the 
Quartet as part of the product.

Sonya: Jo [Marks] seems enthusiastic about the book.  Once we have the 
prospectus and outline we should talk to him again.  I want Addison-Wesley to 
accept it rather than going to other publishers.

Richard: I will raise this at Quartet on Monday.  [.act.approve]

Sonya: What about recording discussion?

Richard: I'll set up mm-book as an archived mailing list like the others.  
[.act.list]

Sonya: My role is to encourage you, but not to do explicit work.  I'll help in 
the early phases, then Andrew will be taking care of you.  Once we have the 
meeting with Peter then I'll get out of the way.

Richard: Can we publish part of all of this on the web?

Sonya: We need to talk to Addison-Wesley about this.  We might identify that in 
the outline.  It's possible.

Richard: The intro and a couple of sections, maybe.

Sonya: As long as it helps stimulate sales rather than cutting into them.

Andrew: Tucker, when should be work on the outline?

ptw: I'll write some more and send it to you.  I'll have some time this 
weekend.  [.act.outline]

Richard: It'd be good to get it to me by the Quartet meeting on Monday.

Richard: What about Andrew's split between this and Dylan?

Andrew: I'm going to use evenings for this.  Dylan don't have a schedule so 
it's hard to predict.  It's going to be full time over the next 4-5 months.  
Evenings and weekends on this book.

Sonya: After Dylan there'll be more time for this.


ACTIONS

.act.prod: Richard will ask the MM Quartet whether product plans can be 
disclosed to MM Book publishers, and whether a demo CD-ROM might be possible.

.act.approve: Richard will obtain approval for effort on the book from the MM 
Quartet.

.act.list: Richard will set up the mm-book mailing list.

.act.outline: Tucker will send the outline to Andrew before Monday.

