\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename bbdb.info
@settitle Insidious Big Brother Database (BBDB) User Manual
@c %**end of header

@copying
This file documents the Insidious Big Brother Database (BBDB)

Copyright (C) 2011-2017 Roland Winkler <winkler@@gnu.org>

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with the Invariant Section being ``GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE,''
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* BBDB: (bbdb).                 Insidious Big Brother Database (BBDB).
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Insidious Big Brother Database (BBDB) User Manual
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, First Chapter, (dir), (dir)
@top BBDB User Manual

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* First Chapter::               The first chapter is the only chapter
                         in this sample.

Appendices
* Copying::                     The GNU General Public License gives you permission
                         to redistribute GNU Emacs on certain terms;
                         it also explains that there is no warranty.
* GNU Free Documentation License::  The license for this documentation.
* Index::                       Complete index.




@end menu

@node First Chapter, Copying, Top, Top
@chapter First Chapter

@cindex chapter, first

This is the first chapter.
@cindex index entry, another

Here is a numbered list.

@enumerate
@item
This is the first item.

@item
This is the second item.
@end enumerate


@node Copying, GNU Free Documentation License, First Chapter, Top
@appendix GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@include gpl.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License, Index, Copying, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi

@node Index,  , GNU Free Documentation License, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
