             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-06-02
                             incomplete doc
                             rit 1999-06-08

Meeting held on 1999-06-02 at 11:49

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, Pekka Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>.

Tony Mann <tony> was on holiday; David Jones <drj> was ill.


NEWS

* MM reference feedback

pekka: We've had some correspondence on the MM reference suggesting new 
additions to the bibliography.


* Dr Dobbs and secrets

daveb: We discussed the question of the Dr Dobbs article and secrets at the 
quartet yesterday, and we're happy with the article as is. We agree that the 
list of ideas should be updated. General feeling is that what's in the article 
-- e.g. the use of mostly-copying collections, the pool system, the leaf pool 
-- is fine. The refset bit too we're happy with -- the basic approach is fairly 
common knowledge (Symbolics) and we don't say how we implement it.

pekka: I suppose I should read the Symbolics papers.

pekka: How does this work in the future? Who makes this kind of decision?

daveb: I guess that depends on how the structure of the company is after the 
CEO makes his decisions and the venture capital comes in.

pekka: I see. So at the moment the task is to record the ideas and what we 
decided to do. So who's going to do that?

daveb: Up to you -- would you be happy doing it?

pekka: Yes. I'll send it around for review.


* Pekka probably away some of next week

pekka: My father has died. I'll be going to Finland probably next week for a 
couple of days or perhaps a bit longer.


* ScriptWorks for MacOS X [Server]

rit: Rumour rather than News: I was talking to Nick Terry and happened to ask 
him how linux was going for ScriptWorks, and he said that actually right now it 
looks like MacOS X (or MacOS X Server) was more important than linux.

pekka: They hinted in March that it might be wanted. We thought it looked 
relatively unproblematic as it's unix-like.

rit: I guess we'll see what EP say.

daveb: Presumably you don't have a machine running MacOS X there?

rit: No. But perhaps we can run it on one of the Macs here? We have a Mac with 
an external hard-drive, which might help, but I don't know how it's configured.

[ Not likely! -- see mail.rit.1999-06-02.15-42(0), 
mail.daveb.1999-06-02.15-53(0) -- rit 1999-06-08]


RELEASES

* dylan

pekka: I suppose nothing's happened for Dylan.


* epcore

pekka: I found a bug yesterday and fixed it. I'm working on segment placement 
now.

rit: The bug was to do with fence posting, so it shouldn't affect Scriptworks.


* web

pekka: Still working on release.web.garden.


* java

pekka: I haven't heard of any progress -- I suppose David has made some.


* dr dobbs

rit: Have we heard anything back from Dr Dobbs about the article?

pekka: Well, I haven't.

daveb: Might be in Tony's mailbox of course.



PLAN

daveb: I assume the plan is unchanged. Are there any issues arising from it? I 
guess we have to take the possibility of a MacOS X port into account.

pekka: Yes, I guess that would basically replace the linux work. Unless Dylan 
need it sooner. The Scriptworks part of linux is quite easy, of course.

pekka: I'll probably have to bring this up again next week, but: I discussed 
with Luke Tunmer the possibility of using the MPS more widely in ScriptWorks. I 
think we should test the performance at the next SW release (chub). That 
requires a small amount of work on our part.

rit: Does it require more work on the part of Luke's group?

pekka: No, not really. The simplest approach would be just to change their 
initialization code. It's probably an almost realistic test.

rit: So we'd give them one pool for everything?

pekka: Yes. In the end of course they'd have to agree to use the MPS -- we 
can't just do it.

rit: Is the allocation behaviour of the framework likely to vary much more 
between platforms than the core rip?

pekka: Yes indeed because it drives the gui.

rit: I guess in that case it's important to test on different platforms.

pekka: Yes.

pekka: I think it would be a good idea in general to get the MPS used more 
widely, and it would be sensible to do the small amount of work necessary for 
the next release to try it -- basically just brushing up the drop-in interface.

daveb: What are the possible gains from this?

pekka: Well, as I said to Luke I can't quote any figures, but there could be 
potentially quite a large gain, because we have a small selection of pools with 
some parameters we can tune, so we should be able to get a better match to 
their requirements than the standard malloc.

pekka: One thing we will get out of a test is actual allocation logs so we can 
get a better idea of what we're dealing with.

rit: Is the main benefit a performance improvement then?

pekka: Yes, well they're not asking for anything but they'd like a performance 
improvement of course. We could probably ask for and get more requirements but 
we probably don't want to do that.

daveb: Yes, remember our priority at the moment is the Java work.

-=-=-

daveb: Next meeting Tuesday as usual. And we can talk to David when he's back 
in to see where we are on Java.

Finish 12:11

