             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-01-05
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-01-05

Start 1999-01-05, 11:35 GMT

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>


tony: We're covering a couple of weeks, although not much happened in the
last week.


NEWS

tony: pekka had a meeting with epcore, at which they expressed new
priorities for brisling.

pekka: The main significant point was that they put a number of things
ahead of doing segment placement. So we've changed our schedules
accordingly.

tony: Feedback from quartet about relative importance of Java work -- that
will also have an effect on scheduling, though it will be further
downstream.

daveb: Yes, quartet considers Java work to be important.


PLAN

tony: I rejigged the plan a bit before Christmas. The work on the locus
manager has been dropped as far as brisling is concerned. Whether or not
that's technially ideal we do now have a more realistic schedule. The main
new work is stuff to improve the performance of the colour pool (see
whether a new pool would be appropriate), work to improve the performance
of the VMNZ arena, and speeding up of bit-tables. The release procedure has
also been improved a bit, with the work of approvals and bug-fixing spread
between pekka, drj and myself.

daveb: So where have we bumped the segment placement task to?

pekka: It's straight after brisling. Finish early February, we hope.

tony: It's still key work, so doing it early is important.


+ Presentation for epcore

tony: I've now scheduled time for us to prepare and do the
meeting/presentation for epcore. All of pekka, drj, tony will be involved
-- we'll probably take the presentation in turns.

daveb: Those tasks in the group view of the plan don't seem to have a duration.

tony: Ah yes, it's not printed it because the column isn't wide enough. The
tasks are both very small -- 0.5 days -- so it doesn't fit.


+ QA release of brisling

rit: ... is on 8th January?

tony: That's right.


+ Viewing the plan

daveb: remind me what colours mean in group view?

tony:
 - grey is baseline -- shows the effect of changing the priorities for
brisling.
     (It has a knock-on slippage effect on the overall plan.)
 - dark blue is work that's been completed.
 - paler blue is work still to be done.
 - red is "critical path task" -- I don't think the planning tool chooses this
     well in general, but in this case it's chosen something fairly
appropriate.

tony: rit's made a couple of suggestions on improving the presentation of
the schedule. I think I can do them for next time.


+ Rescheduling to do Java work sooner

daveb: Has any rescheduling to make the Java work more important gone into
the plan?

tony: Well, it was already quite heavily resourced. drj is working on
brisling in the short term, but then his work relates directly to Java.

tony: We have quite a lot of work in the schedule for Dylan and EP which
also relates to Java -- e.g. the locus manager, the GC strategy work, etc.
But if the goal is to get an existence proof of a Java collector, then that
work isn't essential.

tony: I haven't really worked out what we'd have to sacrifice to get the
Java work done sooner. I'll look at that and report back.

daveb: Assuming that brisling is our immediate priority.


+ Java/Marketing

tony: We have to decide what to do with Java after we've got our initial
proof-of-concept out. Do we have any plans in place to get a tie up with a
real JVM? My understanding is that after we've done the Java tasks that
have been actively scheduled, we'll have something that demonstrates we can
do what we say we can do, but it won't be a sellable product.

daveb: Yes, it all depend on the marketing side of things.

tony: I think the marketing effort could start before we have the
proof-of-concept. Current milestone for the Java work is 1999-04-07.
Perhaps we could bring that in if necessary.

daveb: Yes, the idea of beginning to talk to people now is a sensible one.


+ Not much in the plan for rit

daveb: rit's view is pretty bare. I guess it's a question of how much our
schedule should reflect what he does.

tony: I guess I'm open to suggestions about this.

rit: I'd be very happy for more of my work to be scheduled: it would help
me, and I hope it would help the group too. I need to provide task lists,
etc, and then talk to tony about it.


+ ML

daveb: We're occasionally asked about work on ML. I don't really know what
to do about that. We keep putting it off because it's low priority, but I
wonder if at some point we should bite the bullet and port the MPS.

tony: As far as I'm aware, we haven't got an accurate task breakdown of
what it would take. Maybe that's worth getting.

daveb: Clearly we don't want to do anything on that until the new financial
year anyway, but at some point it might be worth looking at possible
schedules.



DEVELOPMENT ISSUES


+ Disc for pekka

pekka: I'm in need of a new disc for my PC -- I haven't got enough.
Currently I have 2GB plus 1GB. Unfortunately, SW builds are huge.

daveb: Would a 4GB disc be enough? Maybe replacing the 1GB disc?

pekka: Yes, that sounds generous enough.

daveb: Ok, they're quite cheap.

tony: Maybe there are some knocking around.

daveb: I'll fill in a purchase request, and put comments in to the effect
that maybe it can be satisfied by reallocation.


+ New machine for drj?

drj: Systems have been saying things about me getting a new machine, which
I don't know anything about -- or need! A new monitor would be nice, though.

daveb: Oh, I thought you needed a faster machine. It's Gavin's 200MHz
Pentium Pro [bohm]. Then you could have his monitor too.

drj: Unfortunately, his monitor is the same make and much the same age, so
it's similarly fuzzy at high resolutions.

tony: Might it make sense to reassign the machine to Pekka?

pekka: It might, yes.

tony: After brisling rather than before.

daveb: Well, if you want to hold on to it, you should let us know,
otherwise it may get reallocated.

p,tony: It makes sense for the group to hang on to it.

daveb: Ok, so I'll try to get it reallocated to pekka instead of to drj,
and then we'll see whether pekka has enough disc space then.


RELEASE ISSUES

tony: We've already covered this really. Brisling coming up. Pretty well
scheduled.

pekka: What's the state of the VM arena work?

drj: I'm sketching out the design now, seems to be ok. Plan says finished
tomorrow, but I think Thursday is a better date.

pekka: That's true for my work also.

pekka: There are approvals that may take a while. Obviously I won't do the
final release until we've got them done, but I might do the QA release
before that. Minor approvals we can fix in a patch release if a problem
turns up.

pekka: There's some other work scheduling for brisling that was bumped:
segment placement, and also a debug feature. A replay tool might be
squeezed in later, but shouldn't be allowed to affect the release.

pekka: The other task that is scheduled for brisling (in Darwin) is to look
at places in code that have been marked as questionable -- there are quite
a lot of these, and we really need to get a handle on doing this properly
in the future. It's assigned to tony, but he's quite busy with other
things... I'd rather get all the approvals and QA done properly rather than
dive into this issue, though.

tony: Yes, I don't think there's much time between now and the brisling
release.

pekka: We can reschedule whatever remains undone when we come nearer to
brisling and have some idea what the _next_ release is going to be.



QA ISSUES

rit: I've nearly finished the QA report for release.brisling.pre.1, which I
hope to send out today. Summary:-

  - Accepted most of the changes. 3 rejections: MV2 (as expeceted); Ausenpln
    still not as fast as with minnow; version ID failed because of improper use
    of the release process.

  - Not tested on Irix (so the Irix-specific change is untested)

  - 1 new problem: request 160192 - dumper.exe AVERs while dumping MeterValues
    event. Not serious.

  - Performance: no big improvements. Hypothesis that version of compiler was
    skewing results appears to be false. A recent SW patch increases the amount
    freed in the colour pool - and hence removes the benefit of using MVFF.
    Comparison of client & VMNZ arenas show that client is faster for many (but
    not all) tests.

pekka: SW may have a different low memory strategy for client & VM arenas. Not 
sure if this appears in the glue. RIT should talk to Eric about this. It might 
be skewing the results.


+ Colour Pool

[pekka talks about his experiments with replacements for the colour pool]

pekka: segregated fit looks best, but we won't be able to supply segregated
pool in time for brisling. Quite likely they'll end up with segregation in
the glue code, since andyc says he has tried this already. That's obviously
easier to do that a general-purpose mechanism.

+ Telemetry

pekka: Telemetry. Decision needs to be made about how to continue writing
tools for processing event logs. We don't have to make final decisions, but
we need to know where to go from now, and in the shortest term it comes
down to whether dumper is going to be maintained and if so by whom. I've
got some stuff in scheduling: the replay tool, and a task (180022) on
publishing a tool (like the dumper, which is not officially a published
tool). We keep using these all the time, so we need to maintain and fix
them. Who's going to make the decision?

rit: These tools are very important if we want to test performance by
replaying allocation logs, which is probably our best performance measure
short of running ScriptWorks itself.


WORK PRACTICES




AOB


Close at 12:40ish.


