Memory Pool System Kit Open Source License
==========================================

This is the license under which the Memory Pool System Kit is available as
open source.

**It is not the only way the MPS is licensed.**

If the licensing terms aren't suitable for you (for example, you're
developing a closed-source commercial product or a compiler run-time
system) you can easily license the MPS under different terms from
Ravenbrook.  Please write to us <mps-questions@ravenbrook.com> for more
information.

The open source license for the MPS is the [Sleepycat License][] also
known as the "Berkeley Database License".  This license is [GPL
compatible][] and [OSI approved][].  The MPS is "multi licensed" in a
manner similar to MySQL.

[Sleepycat License]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sleepycat_License
[GPL compatible]: http://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html
[OSI approved]: http://opensource.org/licenses/sleepycat


License
-------

Copyright (C) 2001-2012 Ravenbrook Limited <http://www.ravenbrook.com/>.
All rights reserved.  This is the open source license for the Memory
Pool System, but it is not the only one.  Contact Ravenbrook
<mps-questions@ravenbrook.com> if you would like a different license.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Redistributions in any form must be accompanied by information on how
to obtain complete source code for this software and any
accompanying software that uses this software.  The source code must
either be included in the distribution or be available for no more than
the cost of distribution plus a nominal fee, and must be freely
redistributable under reasonable conditions.  For an executable file,
complete source code means the source code for all modules it contains. 
It does not include source code for modules or files that typically
accompany the major components of the operating system on which the
executable file runs.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS
IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT, ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON
ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

---

$Id$
