                    L3: SOFTWARE PRODUCT ENGINEERING
                                kpa.spe
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-23

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document represents the key process area of Software Product 
Engineering, a key area of Level 3 of the Capability Maturity Model, as 
described in paper.sei93.

.readership: This document is intended for anyone involved in project.process.

.purpose: The purpose of Software Product Engineering is to consistently 
perform a well-defined engineering process that integrates all the software 
engineering activities to produce correct, consistent software products 
effectively and efficiently.

Software Product Engineering involves performing the engineering tasks to build 
and maintain the software using the project's defined software process (which 
is described in the Integrated Software Management key process area) and 
appropriate methods and tools.

The software engineering tasks include analyzing the system requirements 
allocated to software (these system requirements are described in the 
Requirements Management key process area), developing the software 
requirements, developing the software architecture, designing the software, 
implementing the software in the code, integrating the software components, and 
testing the software to verify that it satisfies the specified requirements 
(i.e., the system requirements allocated to software and the software 
requirements).

Documentation needed to perform the software engineering tasks (e.g., software 
requirements document, software design document, test plan, and test 
procedures) is developed and reviewed to ensure that each task addresses the 
results of predecessor tasks and the results produced are appropriate for the 
subsequent tasks (including the tasks of operating and maintaining the 
software). When changes are approved, affected software work products, plans, 
commitments, processes, and activities are revised to reflect the approved 
changes.


GOALS

.goal.task:  The software engineering tasks are defined, integrated, and 
consistently performed to produce the software.

.goal.product: Software work products are kept consistent with each other.

