             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-04-06
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-04-06

Present: Andy S, Tony, Pekka, DaveB.


NEWS

Meeting with EPCore.  Reported performance of Brisling.4.
EP Future requirements:
  1. MVFF/EPDL performance
  2. Enhancements for allocation caches
  3. segment placement (clever, with hints from client)
  4. SMP VM arenas
  5. Linux VM
  6. realloc
  7. meaningful MM asserts
  8. pool merging
  9. garbage collection

Brisling.4 released to EP, including Linux version (client arena only).

Diadem web release in beta form.  Pekka will give a copy to Gary today, so
that he can write the installers.  Therefore we can't add new files easily
after today.  We need the rewritten press release from ALMS.

The FAQ for the gc-list now has a link to our MM reference.


RELEASES

Diadem:  Small amount of release work needed.  Pekka planning a couple of
new entries.

Amaretto:  DRJ has found this a slightly longer task than he expected.
Plan updated to 4 weeks instead of 3 weeks.  DaveB reported that DRJ said
this would get a version that would run some small Java programs, and he
would need another week to make it more robust.

Dr. Dobbs article:  Tony is working on a draft outline, and will circulate
it for comments when he's happy with it.


PLAN

GIF files not released since last week.
Tony working on Dr. Dobbs article and Dylan strategy work.
Pekka working on telemetry/replayer tool and web release.

Andy asked about stack-scanning work for Dylan.  Little work is needed on
the MPS side.  The timescales depend more on the Dylan side of things.
Dave asked how much performance we could expect.  Andy replied that it's
difficult to measure in advance, apart from maybe measuring stack sizes.
Java implementations reported 5-10% improvement on GC time, and also
improvements in liveness analysis (2-10% on heap size?).  Take to Dylan
meeting.

EP work:
- Pekka is planned to work on MVFF once telemetry/replayer work is done.
- We have a task for generalising SAC (e.g. multi-threading).  Tony
wondered whether it was worth splitting the task to get out performance
improvements earlier.  One possible improvement is low-memory behaviour,
reclaiming space in the cache.
- Pekka is due to work on segment placement before SAC.
- We haven't planned SMP VM work.  Tony to look at some definition work.
This could be split, as it needs to be implemented separately for NT and
Solaris.  NT implementation we can probably do; Solaris looks more tricky.
- Linux work is planned already (for Dylan as well as EP).  Tony suggested
splitting VM work from rest of task, so that we can juggle them in the plan
if need be.
- realloc isn't currently in the plan, but it is an existing request which 
has already had some design consideration.
- meaningful MM asserts is an open-ended request.  We could catch
particular cases, but we can't guarantee that all our asserts will be
meaningful to the customer.  QA also want better asserts in some areas.  We
don't have this planned.

WORK PRACTICES

No review last week, nor this week, due to absences.  We should plan one
for next week.
Daveb will pursue the Dylan Evolution rating scheme, and mail mm-hackers
with current status.




