             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-04-13
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-04-13

Present (in Enchanted Garden): Andy Sizer <andys>, David Jones <drj>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>, Tony Mann <tony>.

Dave Berry is away this week.


NEWS

tony: release.web.diadem candidate release has been made.

tony: Pekka and I spent pretty much all of Friday talking with Andy and
Martin Simmons <martin> about the possibilities for integrating MPS with
LispWorks. Purpose of meeting was to work out how much effort would be involved
if it was decided to do it.

andys: ... and to spot any horrible problems up front. If the people who
decide these things want to do it, we can supply cost estimates.

tony: I'll write up some notes of how it all looks from MM perspective.
Probably the biggest issue was the save image stuff. We had some ideas
about that.

pekka: Read barriers are also an issue.

andys: ... for performance reasons or in general.

pekka: Well, in general. I don't think it'll be too slow, but perhaps
Martin does.

andys: I can believe that some people would be concerned if there is a read
barrier.

pekka: We'll see how it goes. There's no way of being sure that it's not a
performance problem.

andys: As far as I'm concerned we'll have to suck it and see.

tony: We didn't talk about performance requirements on Friday. There could
be a big difference between providing an MM for LispWorks which works, and
proving something at least as fast as what they've got.

tony: LW  at present doesn't have an incremental collector, so we could
conceivably run MPS pretty much as it is, but non-incrementally, and then
there would be no read-barriers. But I'm not sure that's a very good
solution.

drj: Is this for new (e.g. 64-bit alpha) or old platforms, or both?

tony: Requirements aren't that specific yet. Future directions for LISP
include things like thread support and 64-bit platforms....

andys: ... but it has been unilaterally decided to do windows first.

tony: I guess this is all still background activity unless/until we hear
that a decision has been made.


RELEASES

* release.web.diadem

tony: This has happened. I looked at the URL and saw the changes that I put
in have appeared, but the bibliography references haven't appeared.

pekka: Well, if you get them wrong they don't appear.

tony: Ah. I'll have to check.

tony: Pekka, what's likely to happen now? Including, e.g. if there are
problems.

pekka: Basically it's going to QA now. A week from now, they'll send it to
manufacturing.

tony: Has Gary now built a CD?

pekka: I don't know. I'll ask him to make sure someone looks at the MM
reference. QA will be testing a CD, but I don't know who or how.

pekka: After it's gone to manufacturing, I'll run off a web build from the
same source as far as possible, and give it to the webmaster. Then we can
go on to the next release, web.garden.

pekka: I'd like to ask people to think about doing a little work now and
then -- it's better that way than doing it all in a hurry before the
release.

rit: Have you removed link to webtechs (now porno) site?

pekka: Yes. The icon's still there but no longer links anywhere. Thanks for 
spotting this, rit.

rit: Ah, my browser must have been showing me a cached version.

pekka: How to tell current version: bottom of page should say release 1.6,
not 1.6beta.


* release.java.amaretto

tony: I guess there's not much to say as drj's been away for all of last week.

drj: Yup, it's much as it was.


* release.mps.kinglet

tony: mps.kinglet. I did the sunset on segments stuff a while ago, but I
intend to finish doc changes and set it to approving some time this week.

pekka: Have question: plan shows two milestones: kinglet and strategy
prototype -- which are almost at the same time. Does that make sense?

tony: I think kinglet _is_ the strategy prototype. They're tied together in
the plan.

rit: So there's no milestone that includes the sunset on segments but not
the new strategy?

tony: No, unless chub ends up like that. Unlikely.


* Doctor Dobb's Journal

tony: I mailed out an outline for the article. John Hotchkiss <jh> seemed
reasonably happy with it. I'm expecting to start writing some and mail it
round as and when I have something that's worth mailing round. I still may
want some help. I'll see how it goes.


* release.brisling.4

rit: Any feedback on brisling.4 from EP?

drj: Do we know if they're using it yet?

pekka: No, and I don't know. I'd expect them to be using it. Maybe there
are no problems!


PLAN

tony: I've made some changes and relevelled the plan. The linux work has
now been scheduled to have VM independent of protection, and I've put in a
task for the SMP arena. There was already a task in the plan to complete
the segment changes, removing segments from pools like MVFF and EPDL. I've
pulled that forward, to make sure it's done in time for chub, which I don't
think we'd be able to release without it.

pekka: The final release for brisling.4 keeps moving back! It's now on today.

rit: Ah, that's because although I've given it the ok, I haven't finished
off all the QA yet -- writing it up, and experiments with CAP.

tony: drj, I've given the SMP work to you. Hope that's ok!

pekka: We should get some confidence ahead of time that there is a solution.

tony: Yup. At the moment, I don't have confidence that this is going to
work, in the sense of being better than a shared client arena.

pekka: That would be a shame, but what would be really bad would be if we
found unexpected technical difficulties a week before the release, and had
to push it back.

tony: Sure, before we do the implementation, we need to look at what we're
planning to do. I don't think we yet have a design.

pekka: I think we should write something down about what's missing, though.

tony: Ok, I'll do that then.

pekka: And if drj's going to do the work, obviously he needs to believe in
the design as well.

drj: Yes.


WORK PRACTICES

tony: We said we'd do a review this week. Tomorrow, I guess. We haven't
decided yet what to review.

drj: Part of the problem is a lack of stuff suitable for review. In
particular I don't think there's anything that can be reviewed right now. I
suggest that I work on design.mps.bt, with the intention of reviewing it
next week, and maybe two weeks after than do the implementation.

tony: Would it be easier if I did it? Do you want to be the editor?

drj: I'm relatively easy on that point.

rit: How much work is needed to bring it to a reviewable state.

drj: Maybe four hours. Maybe less. I don't know how accurately it
corresponds to the implementation.

drj: Does that sound plausible?

tony: Yes, but raises some questions. It seems we need to plan ahead more
for our reviews, so that we can get documents into a reviewable state in
time.

drj: Yes, we need a review schedule. I could spend some time on that this week.

tony: Is it worth representing it in MS Project?

drj: Probably not now; maybe later when I have some idea about how long it
would take.



