             NOTES FROM THE MM/PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-10-18
                       meeting.product.1996-10-18
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-10-18

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Clive Harris <cliveh>, Jo Blishen 
<jblishen>, and Mark Preece <mwp> met to discuss Memory Management Product 
progress.

.note: These notes aren't as complete as usual because I was talking for more 
of the time.


QA

Richard: I'm completely happy with progress here.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Clive: Jo will be closely involved in ML and MM and have other duties as well.

Jo: [Later] I will become Product Manager for MM.

ACTION: Richard to meet Jo Blishen next Friday afternoon (.act.meet).

Richard: We should discuss the management model and work towards it.

Jo: We should go for gradual "evolutionary" change.

Richard: I agree.


COMPETETIVE PRODUCTS

Clive: Alex has approved purchase [discharging 
meeting.product.1996-10-07.act.approve].  I have made a deal with Geodesic so 
that we don't have to buy three copies, only one.  SmartHeap has also been 
ordered.  We are waiting for delivery.

Richard: Can you send please send down literature for SmartHeap so that I can 
show it to Richard Tucker?

Clive: You should be able to find information on their web site.

Richard: OK, I'll look there first (.act.sh).


DEVELOPMENT

Richard describes recent developments.  Tucker has visited the UK and the 
prototype of the tools is coming along nicely.

Clive: Can you send me something I can play with?

Richard: I can put together something, yes (.act.proto).

Jo: Me too.

Clive: Hot issues are GUI development resources, and documentation.

Richard: We will need to make a decision about the real tools within the next 
month or so.

Jo: I will find out more about what Webmaker plans are for this.

Clive: You must understand the goals in the hands of an evaluator.


DOCUMENTATION

Richard: Leah Bateman will be doing documentation as long as this new person 
joins.  I am happy with this, except that there is no backup plan.


MARKETING

Clive: I saw your message about articles slagging off GC.  I don't really have 
time or expertise to make a reply.

Richard: We can put together _facts_ for you to work with.

Clive: We can't slag Microsoft off.

Richard: Noted.  We just want to write about technical issues.


TOOLS DEVELOPER

Richard: I spoke to George, who has seen my suggested recruits.  I need to talk 
to him further (.act.george).


WEB PAGES

Richard: Could be up in two to three weeks.


MAILING LISTS

Richard: Jo should join mm-web, mm-people, mm-epcore, mm-ml, mm-dylan, mm-doc, 
mm-db, mm-lfcs, mm-qa (.act.mail).


ACTIONS

.act.meet: Richard and Jo to meet at 1996-10-25 15:00 UT.

.act.sh: Richard to look for SmartHeap stats at MicroQuill's web site, and ask 
Clive for printed literature if none are found.

.act.proto: Richard to assemble what exists of the product together with some 
documentation for Clive and Jo to play with, before 1996-11-01.

.act.reply: The development group to put together a reply to adverse reviews of 
garbage collection in Microsoft's Java VM implementation.  If possible, put 
together a posititon paper, or at least material for one.

.act.ui: Jo to investigate and report on the Web Group's plans for 
cross-platform GUI development.

.act.read: Jo to read lots of stuff about the MM Group in order to assimilate 
current status.

.act.george: Richard to talk to George about tool developer requirements.

.act.mail: Jo to join mailing lists noted above.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-11-01 15:00 UT

