             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-06-15
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-06-17

Notes from MM Development and Product Meeting
1999-06-15

Start at about 16:10.

Present: David Jones <drj>, Richard Tucker <rit>, Tony Mann <tony>.

Pekka Pirinen <pekka> was on leave


NEWS:

tony: We've been reshuffled again. We've lost Dave Berry, John Hotchkiss. We 
have Keith Passaretti as new divisional manager. We don't really know the 
direction for the company or the group. So we'll assume we're carrying on as 
usual.

rit: Jo Blishen's gone too.

drj: So's Ken Jackson.

tony: Also, drj's resigned. His last day is July 6th. Clearly this will be a 
big loss to the group.


RELEASES

* web

tony: Diadem's now on the server, as already reported. Some ongoing work for 
garden.


* dylan

tony: Not a lot to say.

rit: Have Dylan said anything about stack scanning?

tony: Ah, that's fallen through the cracks. From what I remember Dave Berry 
said he'd ask Jonathan about that, and may or may not have done so. I'll try 
and find out.


* epcore

tony: Don't have a lot to say as I haven't spoken to Pekka.


* java

tony: drj has made some progress. We've decided the best thing is for him to 
hand over what he's done to me, and I can finish that off. Then drj can 
concentrate on things that are more uniquely relevant to him in his remaining 
time.


* Dr Dobbs

tony: I hadn't had any feedback when I came back from holiday, so I prodded 
them for feedback. I got a reply saying that Tim Kientzle the editor has so far 
only skimmed what I sent them. He hasn't found any outrageous problems so far 
and will get back to me soon with more comments.


* real time Java

tony: We've had meetings about real-time Java. This is a potential future 
development area. We should get some feedback about what the direction of the 
group is before investing lots of effort in it.



PLAN

tony: I've updated the plan to reflect what's been done in the last three 
weeks, but I didn't get to talk to Pekka before he went away. So the plan is 
unduly pessimistic -- I assume Pekka has done some work that isn't reflected 
there. Main changes:
 - I've represented the Java handover process from drj to me
 - I've reassigned drj's tasks to pekka and myself
 - I've left some tasks for drj to do. In particular, the buffer design (which 
I've shrunk as a task) and the process retrospective. I'm open to suggestions. 
If you (drj) think there are other things you ought to or would like to do 
before you go, then say so.

drj: Approval of sunsets on segments probably should be 4 days rather than 2. I 
don't as yet think it'll need a rework; it's just a large change.

drj: Me and rit have been investigating an arena hysteresis performance 
problem. This is request 160262. It's hard to tell what performance improvement 
it might bring.

drj: Basically problem is: hysteresis fund doesn't batch up page unmapping as 
much as it might. In some circumstances it can do more calls to unmap than the 
previous code; that might be a problem. Evidence so far isn't clear about 
whether it makes a lot of difference.

tony: Did you have a solution in mind?

drj: Make it batch things up more 8-). Current code does batch things up quite 
a lot, but it will never batch up operations on a set of pages whose page 
descriptors are on more than one page of the page table. Code might be made a 
lot simpler too.

drj: Also, it might be worth looking at rewriting some of the arena design. I 
was aware when I wrote the hysteresis stuff that the design wasn't written down.

tony: Yes, and it's pretty hairy.

tony: So how long d'you think it would take to do 160262?

drj: At least a couple of days in development.

tony: And improvements to arena design?

drj: Probably longer -- more like 5 days. And there's not much time left!

tony: I'd guess that what we're going to have to do is have you do the design 
doc as quickly as you can (don't worry about formatting &c,  and could even be 
verbally if it helps). So that's arena design and also buffer design.

rit: On the subject of 160262: from looking at profiles, it's not clear that 
the slowdown is entirely due to the increased number of unmaps -- it may be a 
case of the new code generally being slower.

tony: Something's wrong in the plan with the chub release. (The finish date is 
broken.) Chub at the moment appears on the 19th October. I guess that shown 
that MM's commitments are basically untenable with two developers. We'll have 
to see what that means as far as management are concerned.


AOB

tony: This workshop on hardware support -- there was some suggestion that we 
might do something for it. I think there was a fairly tight timescale for 
getting a proposal document in.

drj: Workshop October 10th. July 12th is the electronic submission deadline.

tony: So we've got a month. We should think about what if anything we want to 
do for that. Again we should find out if there's any possibility that transport 
out there would get paid for.


Finish 16:29.

