               NOTES FROM THE MM/LFCS MEETING, 1996-07-08
                        meeting.lfcs.1996-07-08
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-07-08

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby met Paul Jackson and Healf Goguen at the LFCS in 
Edinburgh on 1996-07-08 to supply information about MM designs and make 
progress on the collaborative work.


AGENDA

.agenda:
  1. Secrecy Issues
  2. Question and Answer Session
  3. Lunch
  4. Planning
  5. Further Questions


SECRECY

.sec.conf: Paul and Healf needed secrecy status clarified by the end of the 
week because they were both going to conferences at which they would have to 
discuss the MM/LFCS collaboration.  Richard promised to raise the issue with 
George Cleland and attempt to get things clarified quickly (.act.sec).

.sec.source: Richard conveyed the decision by George that they could not be 
given a copy of the sources, but could have access while at Harlequin sites.  
This was agreed to be regretable, but accepted.  Brian Monahan's involvement 
may be able to help provide more information in future.

.sec.time: Paul pointed out that it would be useful to know how long things are 
to remain secret.  Some things will become public when we release the product.  
Some internal stuff wont.  What we need is some statement of longer term 
policy.  Richard to consider this and raise it with George (.act.sec).  Perhaps 
we need to classify secrets into "edge" stuff which becomes public on release 
and that which must remain secret for as long as possible.  LFCS could publish 
stuff in time for the release.  Could also do with a statement of publication 
policy.

.sec.model: Modelling surely isn't secret, but is specified as such in 
overview.ideas  (.act.correct).  Richard stated that LFCS work, modelling 
concept and details, the fact that LFCS are working with the MM Group, etc. are 
not secret and may be discussed.

.sec.zone: Zones doesn't have a status (.act.correct).

.sec.beta: LFCS may be interested in beta-testing the MM Product.  This could 
provide valuable feedback.


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

.qa: A Q&A session followed in which Richard described the abstract collection 
process (overview.ideas.acp), reference partitions (overview.ideas.refpart), 
the symmetry of barriers, reference ranks (overview.ideas.refrank), and 
analysis techniques.


PLANS

.plan: Plans were discussed and are summarized in the actions (.act.pvs and 
.act.spec in particular).


ACTIONS

.act.next: Meet again on the 23rd of September.

.act.pvs: Paul will have a specification in PVS of a simple tri-colour marking 
write-barrier algorithm.

.act.feedback: Richard should feed back more about benefits.  Concretely, we 
should account problems fixed or work avoided to LFCS that results from the 
collaboration and from any models developed.

.act.sec: Richard to raise secrecy policies with George this week: both 
immediate secrecy and secrecy in the longer term.

.act.brian: Healf needs to meet and talk to Brian as soon as possible after 
August 5th.  Should arrange as soon as possibe (tomorrow).

.act.spec: Healf will specify all relevant aspects of Paul's stuff, and will 
attempt to generalize this to the five phase.

.act.day: Richard will allocate a day to talking to LFCS between now and the 
next meeting.

.act.write: Richard will write a few paragraphs about the benefits to date of 
work with the LFCS.

.act.correct: Richard to correct overview.ideas.  Modelling isn't secret, and 
zones need a status.

