                    LEVEL 2 -- THE REPEATABLE LEVEL
                           paper.sei93.level2
                              draft quote
                           gavinm 1997-06-23

From pages O-14 - O-15 of paper.sei93:

At the Repeatable Level, policies for managing a software project and 
procedures to implement those policies are established. Planning and managing 
new projects is based on experience with similar projects. An objective in 
achieving Level 2 is to institutionalize effective management processes for 
software projects, which allow organizations to repeat successful practices 
developed on earlier projects, although the specific processes implemented by 
the projects may differ. An effective process can
be characterized as practiced, documented, enforced, trained, measured, and 
able to improve.

Projects in Level 2 organizations have installed basic software management 
controls. Realistic project commitments are based on the results observed on 
previous projects and on the requirements of the current project. The software 
managers for a project track software costs, schedules, and functionality; 
problems in meeting commitments are identified when they arise. Software 
requirements and the work products developed to satisfy them are baselined, and 
their integrity is controlled. Software project standards are defined, and the 
organization ensures they are faithfully followed. The software project works 
with its subcontractors, if any, to
establish a strong customer-supplier relationship.

The software process capability of Level 2 organizations can be summarized as 
disciplined because planning and tracking of the software project is stable and 
earlier successes can be repeated. The project's process is under the effective 
control of a project management system, following realistic plans based on the 
performance of previous projects.

