      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-09-20
                       meeting.product.1996-09-20
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-09-20

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Alex Parnes <alex>, and Clive Harris 
<cliveh> met to discuss progress on Memory Management Products.  Wendy Phillips 
<wendyp> joined later.


QA

Alex: Richard Tucker is the choice for QA.

Clive: Note that I didn't meet David Hedley.

Alex: The only problems with Richard are that he doesn't start immediately.  
Starts in January full-time, but part-time for a day or two a week.  This was 
decided by George and me since the last meeting.  The other problem is that 
it'll be a year or two's assignment.

Richard: We just have to cope with that in a couple of years.

Alex: Richard will be in charge of SP by then anyway.

[No specific actions here.  I will prepare for RIT's arrival. -- richard]


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Alex: Jo Blishen <jblishen> is looking at all the opportunities for product 
management but it hasn't been decided on which projects she'll be specializing 
yet.

Clive: Which other products are competing for her interests?

Alex: All products.  The discussion is coming at lunch-time today.  Decisions 
will follow fairly quickly.  I also have another resume of a potential product 
manager on the west coast.

[No specific actions here. -- richard]


COMPETITIVE PRODUCTS

Clive: This is still going through.

Alex: This action item should be changed to "competitive analysis".

[Done, see .act.compete. -- richard]


JAVA

Clive: Nothing new has developed.

Richard: Clive and I were going to meet before I went on holiday, but didn't 
quite make it.

ACTION: Richard and Clive to meet next week (.act.meet).


DEVELOPMENT

Richard: Re-organization and delegation of planning is going well so far.  I've 
been able to get some development work done, which has reduced the major risk 
quite a bit.  I'm optimistic.


DOCUMENTATION

Clive: How long before we have something we can look at and decide how to 
market?

Richard: I think you mean something complete which can be evaluated even if 
it's not at full quality.

Clive: Yes.

Richard: Tucker has made some progress on the tools, and we may have a 
prototype which can be evaluated quite soon.  The main problem is 
documentation.  There has been no documentation effort yet at all.  
Documentation is now on the critical path to an alpha release.

Alex: What is the current estimate?

Richard: As before, six to eight man-months of solid documentation effort.

Alex: What we need to do is write to Ken and also Glen Bach, who is now head of 
communications, including the previous effort estimation from Ken, and require 
a formal respone on how they are going to supply the resources.  Richard, could 
you draft something about the effort to date?

Richard: Yes.  I'll do that and send it to you (.act.draft).


TOOLS DEVELOPER

Richard: I'll persue Peter Benie and Ian Jackson.  No change in hiring policy.  
Doors are still open.

Clive: Have HR got this role on their books?

Alex: It doesn't seem to matter.

Richard: I did want someone at 1CC.

Alex: 1CC is overpopulated as it is.  You should persue your possible 
candidates in Cambridge rather than worry about their location.

ACTION: Richard to chase Peter and Ian and see what's happened to their 
applications (.act.chase).


ACTIONS

.act.compete: Clive to prepare a detailed competitive analysis against other 
products.

.act.slot: Wendy will pick a date with 10:00/15:00 slot every fortnight and 
inform mm-product.

.act.meet: Richard and Clive to arrange to meet next week to discuss Java 
opportunities.

.act.draft: Richard to draft message about history and status of documentation 
for MM and sent it to Alex.

.act.chase: Richard to chase Peter Benie and Ian Jackson's applications.


NEXT MEETING

.next: See .act.slot.

