             NOTES FROM THE MM/SUPPORT MEETING, 1996-08-15
                       meeting.support.1996-08-15
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-08-23

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> and Tucker Withington <ptw> met Brigitte 
Bovy <bbb> and Jeff Del Papa <dp> so that Richard could brief them about the 
potential memory management product.


NOTES

.desc: Richard described the MPS architecture, the Model of Use, and current 
plans and projects in the MM Group.

.sugg: Support had some suggestions for the product:

  .sugg.trans: The product could include a tool for translating code from level 
1 use (drop-in) to level 2 use (MPS interface/pools).

  .sugg.freebie: Harlequin could give away level 1 of the product, or at least 
give away a shareware version which is limited in some way.

  .sugg.limit: If the MM is a DLL then there should be some simple mechanism 
for controlling who can make use of it (a capability) so that only licensed 
customers can take advantage.

