             NOTES FROM THE MM QUARTET MEETING, 1997-04-14
                       meeting.quartet.1997-04-14
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-04-14

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Jo Blishen <jblishen>, and Clive Harris 
<cliveh> met to discuss progress on the Memory Management Product.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.plan: Jo and Richard to produce an MM product 
plan - we will meet at start of April to discuss this.  Jo to travel down to 
Cambridge.

Richard and Jo will discuss this when Jo comes to Cambridge on 1997-04-28.  
Discussions will be based on design.product.arch, which will have a full draft 
by that time.

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.book.approval: Jo to write paragraph about book 
and send to senior management for their approval - still to finish.

Jo: I'm still drafting this paragraph.  She believes it is not an urgent issue, 
as senior management are aware of the book development.  She has to deal with 
the responses from developers which are waiting in her mailbox.

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.rival.richard: Richard will investigate rival 
products.

Richard: I will talk to George about whether we can take the risk of ordering 
rival products and then releasing our own (.act.rival.approve).

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.rival.richard.liase: Richard to liaise with 
Clive about investigating rival products.

See above.

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.3rdparty.richard: Richard to speak to George 
(and Cliff?) about shipping products with 3rd party Memory Managers.

Richard: George's response was a bit ambiguous.  He said that the most suitable 
component would always be used, and that third party components weren't out of 
the question.

meeting.quartet.1997-04-07.act.overview.richard: Richard will look at Leah's 
product description early next week and pass it to the quartet by the next 
meeting.

Richard: An incomplete outline, design.product.arch(1), is available now.  
Should have complete coverage by the end of this week, and be ready for 
discussion.  Note that it really needs checking against requirements, which 
have still to be generated.  This is a major risk.  Marketing requirements 
include: slick UI, good evaluation, better then competitors in all major 
functions.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

.plan: Jo: The big thing is product plan to be worked on from design.  I want 
to update "Product Specs and Schedules" with details.

.plan.source: Richard: We should source that from a proper plan.

.dylan: Jo: Dylan status: They are bringing stand-alone compiler together, 
environment being bolted on.  Not much externally visible progress in past few 
weeks.  Release schedule is same as it was.


DEVELOPMENT

.dev: Richard: Most of the product is there.  Needs icing and tool.  Confident 
of feasibility provided a new Group Manager is hired.


DOCUMENTATION

.doc: Nothing to report.


QA

.qa: Mark Preece not present.  Richard intends speak to him when he's at the 
House, on 1997-04-28 and 29, or thereabouts.


MARKETING

.mkt.resources: HiNTs has taken most of Clive's time.  A new hire, Chris Cox is 
joining.  Background in C++, selling software tools, and marketing software 
tools.  Clive will introduce him to Richard and make a judgement about how to 
split Clive's responsibility.

.mkt.geodesic: Geodesic has entered second phase "get commercially real".  Need 
to keep an eye on them over the next few months.  We can look at this as 
pioneering and developing the market.  Otoh, they are stealing the time 
window.  We will be head-to-head against Geodesic.  Need to emphasize our 
benefits over their product.


SCOPE OF MEETINGS

.scope: These meetings should cover decisions about product, and reporting of 
changes concerning internal products that affect external product.  On the 
other hands, these meetings are a point of contact with QA and Marketing for 
Richard.  Jo should participate as Dylan product manager when it's expedient to 
do so.


ACTIONS

.act.rival.approve: Richard to speak to George about whether rival products can 
be purchased.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1997-04-28 15:00 (but maybe earlier)

