             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-05-04
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-05-04

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Pekka Pirinen <pekka>,
Richard Tucker <rit>, Tony Mann <tony>

Start: 1999-05-04 11:39.

NEWS

drj: Weiser (of Bohm-Weiser fame) has died.

tony: I haven't done any planning updates & I'm not sure it's worth going
over all the releases again since we did so two days ago.


WORK PRACTICES

* review

daveb: How did the review go? Are we going to have one this week? I wanted
to make sure we didn't lose any tempo.

drj: I thought it went quite well

pekka, rit: Yes.

drj: I'm currently still editing the document. I haven't thought about what
we might do this week.

daveb: I guess we need someone else to be the editor.

drj: The main problem is lack of stuff of sufficient quality to review.

daveb: That's pretty bad in itself.

tony: What we've discussed before is having a review schedule of what to
review when, and planning enough in advance to have documents ready for
review.

daveb: So this week, should we have a review, or use the time to prepare
documents for review?

drj: The latter, I think.

daveb: Do we have any pressing deadlines at the moment, apart from the JVM
stuff?

tony: One other thing is the Dr Dobbs Journal stuff. I'm away on
holiday towards the end of the month, and I'd like to get it ready by then. 
Shouldn't rule me out as an editor, though.

daveb: Would it be feasible to take a document each? (including Richard?)
Or can two people cooperate on a document?

drj: Well, it's lot of work.

pekka: It's hard to split documents up.

daveb: So question is who's going to be in change of organising schedule &c?

drj: Well, I've already started work on a schedule.

tony: I'll try to get it up on the webpage.

daveb: OK, so that's actions on all four of you. Drj to coordinate.



AOB

* persistent objects for Dylan

tony: I was talking to Jonathan on Friday. He raised an issue which I think
was discussed with MM a number of years ago: to have some MPS support for
persistent objects for Harlequin Dylan. We discussed a few ideas on the
subject on Friday. He says he's running into limitations in the technology
of DOOD, and would be interested in getting some support from the memory
manager. I think it's probably something we should consider quite seriously.

daveb: What's involved? Persistence is quite a general term?

tony: Well, he wants to meet the same requirements that DOOD is already
meeting, but in a way that scales better. MPS is in a position to help.
Finding out the requirements in more detail, and then producing a general
overview, would be first steps in working on this.

daveb: One hopes we could generalise it too.

tony: Yes.

daveb: How does this fit in with Dylan priorities? Stack-scanning,
scheduling policy, heap introspection?

tony: I think all those things are more pressing, as Dylan do have a
working mechanism (DOOD). But if we can get it into our psyche now, we can
mull some ideas over.

daveb: So it sounds like we shouldn't spend too much time on it. If
Jonathan could come up with a set of requirements that would be good.

tony: Yes, we didn't have a formal discussion about it.

pekka: Is there some documentation about DOOD?

tony: I don't know. I guess it would be in the Dylan notebook somewhere.

daveb: Sounds like we need to ask Jonathan about documentation too.


* new CEO

rit: Do we know anything about when our new CEO is coming online?

daveb: I believe he's officially starting today, and is in the Oubliette.
What was the Panoptica room is the new Oubliette, apparently.

Finish at 11:53.


