              NOTES FROM GENERAL GROUP MEETING, 1996-08-28
                       meeting.general.1996-08-28
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-08-28

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Nick Barnes <nickb>, David Jones <drj>, and 
Tucker Withington <ptw> met to discuss Richard's proposals for group 
reorganization and project delegation, as described in 
mail.richard.1996-08-23.15-26.  Gavin Matthews <gavinm> was away conducting a 
review for the ML Group, but the proposed reorganization does not affect him so 
directly.


NOTES

.before:

[Process is missing and should be connected to richard.]

.after:

[ML is missing and should be connected to richard.]

.process: David suggested that Gavin takes over process as a project in much 
the same way as EPCore and Dylan.

.recruit: Tucker has a contact who could make a good Product Manager for MM and 
other groups.  Richard suggested he discuss it with AlexP and will discuss it 
with Alex at the next Quartet meeting.


ACTIONS

.act.go: Everyone is happy to try the new organization, so implementation will 
begin immediately.

.act.watch: We must watch the organization itself to make sure it works.  Gavin 
may be assigned to optimise the process.

