                           MM QUARTET MEETING
                       meeting.quartet.1997-03-19
                               draft doc
                          jblishen 1997-03-19

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Attended by Richard <richard>, Jo <jblishen> and Mark <mwp>.  Clive not 
available.



ACTIONS FROM THIS MEETING

.act.rival.richard: Richard will investigate rival products.

.act.rival.richard.liase: Richard to liaise with Clive.

.act.3rdparty.richard: Richard to speak to George (and Cliff?) about shipping 
products with 3rd party Memory Managers.

.act.overview.richard: Richard will look at it early next week and pass it to 
the quartet by the next meeting.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.plan: Jo and Richard to produce an MM product plan - we will meet at start 
of April to discuss this.  Jo to travel down to Cambridge.

.act.book.approval: Jo to write paragraph about book and send to senior 
management for their approval - still to finish.

.act.rival: Clive will prod the order for rival products to see if he can move 
it again and report back at next meeting.  Clive has mailed Richard because he 
needs a justification for this and he doesn't have time to do the competitive 
analysis himself. .act.rival.richard: Richard will investigate rival products.  
Tucker wants to look at them for the book.  Risk of development doing this is 
that they might be exposed to accusations of stealing parts of rival products.  
.act.rival.richard.liase: Richard to liaise with Clive.

.act.webprinter: Jo to speak to Neil about multi platform requirements on Dylan 
from WebPrinter and what are the web groups plans to ship the Dylan C Back 
end.  No plans to ship WebPrinter at the moment.  .act.3rdparty.richard: 
Richard to speak to George (and Cliff?) about shipping products with 3rd party 
Memory Managers.


REPORTS ON ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.riccardo: Jo will negotiate some of Riccardo Teffarelo's time from Glenn 
Bach - she will keep trying.  Drop this action because of appointment of Nick 
Dalton - he can give estimates instead.

.act.luke: Richard will talk to Luke about estimating GUI development effort.  
Drop this action - same reason as above.

.act.gill: Ditto Gill Peacegood.  Drop this action - same reason as above.

.act.book.spec: Richard to make sure the plans that Tucker has end up in the 
spec.  This is being worked on.  Tucker has written an outline to be looked at 
tomorrow.

.act.equipment.richard: Richard to speak to Dave Walsh about upgrading PCs and 
to fill in HIS forms for equipment purchases.  Decision is to upgrade one 
machine and get one new machine - this is progressing.

.act.overview: Richard to write the outline MM product description to provide 
an overview of the product.  See below.


DARWIN

MM group is looking at procedures for Darwin and writing it all up.  Will 
include QA procedures and Richard Tucker is involved with this.  Documented 
process coming together.  Mark and Richard will sit down and chat about this 
when Mark's in the UK in April.


REPORT ON DOC MEETING

Richard presented all this stuff to Leah and she has written up a lot of notes 
about product tools, interfaces, memory manager, etc.  .act.overview.richard: 
Richard will look at it early next week and pass it to the quartet by the next 
meeting.

Leah spent all week with MM - mostly input came from Richard.  Tucker not 
involved at all.


NEW DEVELOPMENT MANAGER

Richard is speaking about job descriptions with Jo Bragger for new MM 
development manager.


DATE OF NEXT MEETING

Monday 7 April at 10am/3pm.



