                 NOTES FROM MM/DOC MEETING, 1996-11-05
                         meeting.doc.1996-11-05
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-11-05

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> met Leah Bateman <lmb> to discuss starting 
user documentation for the Memory Management product.


NOTES

.meet: We agreed to meet during the week of 1996-01-13 to 1996-01-17 for two 
days in order to launch the documentation effort.  Richard is travelling to 1CC 
then anyway.

.meet.again: We will probably meet again a little later (probably at the end of 
January) in the UK as Leah will need to travel to introduce a new documentor to 
her previous work.

.plan: User documentation will probably be organized managed in much the same 
way as development, i.e. there will be a requirement specification, and an 
evolutionary delivery plan which details how the requirements will be met.  The 
documentation requirements will need to be created ahead of time.

.ref: It seems sensible to start with reference documentation since all other 
user documentation will rest upon it.

.qa: Richard suggested that Leah read the notes from meetings with Richard 
Tucker (meeting.qa.1996-10-03, meeting.qa.1996-10-16, meeting.qa.1996-10-31), 
which contain transcripts of descriptions of the interface to the MPS.

.web: Leah is reading the MM/Web pages and will assemble some notes about what 
introductory material might be helpful for newcomers to the memory management 
field.

