      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-08-29
                       meeting.product.1996-08-29
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-08-29

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Alex Parnes <alexp>, and Clive Harris 
<cliveh> met to discuss Memory Managmeent product progress.  Mark Preece <mwp> 
was on holiday.


PRODUCT FEEDBACK

Richard: George says he agrees with the analysis and direction and is 
comfortable with the whole thing.

Alex: Jo says it looks fine.  He still wants to talk about it, but...  We 
proceed as if it's approved, and perhaps still try to get Jo's attention in a 
quartet meeting with him.


QA

Alex: I spoke with Richard Tucker -- interesting chap -- I sent a note to Jo 
Bragger.

Richard: He's good.

Alex: The problem I have is the inconsistency between QA and what he's persuing 
in his studies.

[Long discussion follows concerning Richard Tucker's suitability for QA, mainly 
from Richard's personal knowledge of him.]

Alex: What we all have to understand is that Richard Tucker is likely to move 
around in the company after a year or two on MM.

Richard: Oh, I agree.  I'd expect him to want to do that.

Alex: Most QA people stay in QA.

Richard: What about David Hedley?

Alex: Mature.  Don't know about his professional abilities.  He's clearly a 
candidate.  I will arrange for you to meet him.  [See .act.dh.]

Richard: I will grill him on MM-applicable stuff when I meet him, and will then 
be able to give a comparison with Richard Tucker.  Is it a choice between them 
or could we use both?

Alex: If you're happy with Richard Tucker we could use David Hedley elsewhere.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Alex: No news on product manager recruitment.

Richard: FYI, I'm delegating some product management work (see 
mail.richard.1996-08-23.15-26).


COMPETITIVE PRODUCTS

Clive: That's going through.


JAVA

Clive: The Java community is not really aware of memory management yet.

Richard: We need to be ready to sweep in with a solution.

Clive: There are possible opportunities at Microsoft.  We need to see what we 
can generate.


DEVELOPMENT

Richard: We're developing prototypes in CLIM using LispWorks and MCL.

Clive: Webmaker customers don't like the GUI.  It's clunky, non-intuitive.  
Layout management is appalling.  It doesn't look the business.  It's a product 
requirement that the tools look slick, professional, etc.  If you can do that 
with CLIM then the executable size can be forgiven.

Alex: I would also be reluctant.  The Webmaker product has received accolades 
_in_spite_ of the interface and huge footprint.  I would be very careful about 
going down the Webmaker route.

Richard: Rod and Tucker will talk about the this soon.

Richard: If we want native tools we still need a native tool developer.

Alex: Richard, talk to George Cleland.  I'll talk to Jo and Eileen.  The issue 
is focusing the HR organization to doing this.

Richard: I did find someone, but he's not available until after Christmas.

Alex: I suggest you still go after him anyway.

Richard: I will talk to him again informally.


ACTIONS

.act.dh: Alex will arrange for Clive and Richard to meet David Hedley.

.act.microsoft: Richard will write down possible opportunities at Microsoft.

.act.dev: Alex will talk to Jo and Eileen to try and move HR to get a tools 
developer.  Richard will talk to George Cleland likewise.

.act.peter: Richard will have another informal discussion with Peter Benie (the 
potential tools developer) about possibly starting after Christmas.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-09-20 15:00 BST

