             SUMMARY OF MM/EP MANAGEMENT MEETING 1996-01-25
                       meeting.epcore.1996-01-25
                               draft doc
                            nickb 1996-02-06

.intro: On Thursday 25th January 1996, at 10:15 am, Richard Brooksby and Nick 
Barnes met Keith Passaretti and Andy Cave to discuss management issues raised 
by the MM/EP-core project.
.scope: The scope of the meeting was:
.scope.intro: To introduce Richard and Keith, who had not previously met.
.scope.goals: To discuss the MM/EP-core goals goal.epcore. If necessary, to 
modify these goals in the light of discussion.
.scope.req: To discuss the MM/EP-core requirements req.epcore. If necessary, to 
modify these requirements in the light of discussion. To discuss and plan 
future involvement of EP developers in refining the requirements.
.scope.req.target: To identify clearly the required target product of the 
MM/EP-core deliverables.
.scope.plan: To discuss the MM/EP-core delivery plan and schedule (currently in 
design.epcore.overview.deliv). If necessary, to modify this plan in the light 
of discussion. To identify management issues which will arise from the schedule.
.scope.plan.ep: To discuss the role of EP developers in meeting the delivery 
schedule. 
.scope.plan.qa: To discuss the role of SW-QA in the MM/EP-core development and 
delivery.
.goal: The goals of the meeting were as follows:
.goal.inform.ep: To make clear to Keith the purpose and status of the 
MM/EP-core project.
.goal.inform.mm: To inform Richard and Nick of the effects of EP management 
changes on MM/EP-core.
.goal.agree: To reach agreement on future management of the MM/EP-core project.
.goal.plan: To establish a firm development and delivery plan for MM/EP-core.
.goal.plan.resource: To identify and commit resource requirements of the 
delivery plan.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.inform.ep: The structure of the MM project, its existing design (the MPS), and 
potential future products were outlined by Richard.
.review.goals: The goals were reviewed and considered good.
.review.req: The requirements were reviewed.
.review.req.spinlock:  Keith asked about the spinlock requirement 
req.epcore.fun.dl.spinlock. Spinlocks were explained, and it was explained that 
this requirement was probably the result of a misunderstanding.
.review.req.extend: Andy mentioned the idea of allowing short-term memory 
extension as a low memory action.
.review.req.class: Keith asked about the different classes of memory managed. 
This was explained.
.review.req.cache: Andy described the current system used in the RIP to speed 
allocation of some types of object by having a statically allocated cache 
dedicated to a particular type. The hope was expressed that code like that 
could go away when the new memory manager is in place.
.review.req.involve: The involvement of EP developers in the further evolution 
of the requirements document was discussed. It was decided that Keith would 
identify EP developers to take part, and Nick would take it from there.
.review.req.target: It was clarified by Andy that the target of the MM/EP-core 
project was the trunk of the v20 RIP for ScriptWorks 4.0 and beyond; that there 
was no intention of bolting it onto any earlier version of ScriptWorks.
.review.req.deliver: It was decided that deliverables should be in the form of 
source accompanied by build mechanisms. This avoids the problems of delivering 
linkable objects on every ScriptWorks platform. 
.review.plan: The development plan was reviewed.
.review.plan.names: It was noted that "Initial Memory Manager" was not a good 
name, and "Prototype Memory Manager" would be better. Similarly, the 
"Evaluation" MM might be better called the "Equivalent" MM.
.review.plan.dates:  It was noted that recent disruption (e.g. EP management 
changes, ML product schedule) may cause the Layered Memory Manager delivery 
date to slip slightly from 1996-03-01 to, say, 1996-03-15. Further slippage is 
not expected.
.plan.mm.layer: Nick is to continue work on developing the MMI layer, working 
towards the Layered Memory Manager.
.plan.mm.platform: Suitable development/test platforms for Nick to use were 
discussed. Either a [Power]Mac or a Windows NT platform may be best, as they 
are the commonest platforms amongst customers. Richard will consider this 
further.
.plan.ep: It was established that one or two weeks of EP developer time will be 
required during February.
.plan.ep.contact: It was agreed that Keith should decide on a single developer 
to liaise with MM, to provide a first point of contact for technical questions 
and a default source of EP developer time. Some names were put forward.
.plan.ep.now: Andy will continue to provide technical advice in the interim.
.plan.qa: It was established that a week or two of QA development time will be 
required in February and March, and more later.
.plan.qa.manage: Keith will discuss the MM/EP-core project with QA management 
to secure the necessary resources.
.plan.qa.test: Nick will interact with QA people to establish a development 
test framework.

