                  THE PLAN FOR THE MM/PROCESS PROJECT
                              plan.process
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-10-30

INTRODUCTION

.scope: This document is the plan of the work required for Process Development 
(see project.process).  It show how the goals of the project will be achieved.

.readership: This documented is intended for MM Group members.

.hist.0: 1996-10-30  Richard  Created
.hist.1: 1997-05-06  GavinM  Rewritten for Baseline release.


PLAN

.version: There are five versions planned, relating to the layers in the 
software process Capability Maturity Model (see book.humphrey89): Baseline (see 
version.process.baseline(0)), Repeatable (version.process.repeatable(0)), 
Defined (see version.process.defined(0)), Managed (see 
version.process.managed(0)), Optimising (see version.process.optimising(0)).

.baseline: There is a variety of tasks required to make our process documented.


Baseline: Configuration Management

.baseline.config.process: Complete process.darwin -- 3 man-hours 
request.process.170395

.baseline.config.proc: Finish and tidy up Darwin procedures -- 12 man-hours 
request.process.170171 request.process.170396

.baseline.config.hope: Check Hope procedures -- 0.5 man-hours 
request.process.170398


Baseline: Development

.baseline.dev.process: Complete process.develop -- 3 man-hours 
request.process.170399

.baseline.dev.impl: Correct guide.impl.c.* -- 4 man-hours 
request.process.170362


Baseline: Inspection

.baseline.insp.process: Cut down and update process.review -- 2 man-hours 
request.process.180005

.baseline.insp.proc: Split up and tidy proc.review -- 6 man-hours 
request.process.180005

.baseline.insp.edit-guide: Correct guide.edit -- 0.5 man-hours 
request.process.180005

.baseline.insp.edit-proc: Correct proc.review.edit -- 0.5 man-hours 
request.process.180005


Baseline: InfoSys

.baseline.infosys.keywords: Document relevant ones -- 2 man-hours 
request.process.170405

.baseline.infosys.overview: Reorganise design, overview, etc. -- 6 man-hours 
request.process.170135


Baseline: Process

.baseline.process.inv: Write an inventory of process documents -- 2 man-hours 
request.process.170218

.baseline.process.overview: Write an overview of process documents -- 6 
man-hours request.process.170218

.baseline.process.release: Write release notes for the baseline version -- 2 
man-hours request.process.170407


Baseline: Miscellaneous

.baseline.misc.bib: Correct guide.bib -- 2 man-hours request.process.170406

