             NOTES FROM THE MM QUARTET MEETING, 1997-02-25
                       meeting.quartet.1997-02-24
                               draft doc
                          jblishen 1997-02-24

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Attended by Richard <richard>, Jo <jblishen>, Clive <cliveh> and Mark 
<mwp>.


OUTSTANDING ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.report: Richard will restart weekly progress reporting.

.act.riccardo: Jo will negotiate some of Riccardo Teffarelo's time from
Glenn Bach.

.act.luke: Richard will talk to Luke about estimating GUI development effort.

.act.gill: Ditto Gill Peacegood.

.act.plan: Jo and Richard to produce a MM product plan.


REPORTS ON ACTIONS FROM PREVIOUS MEETINGS

.act.andy: Richard will talk to Andy Cave about EP's MM requirements for the 
4.5 release.
PDF requirements have been discussed.  Nick is on top of the situation and 
communication is happening.  There's not much work involved _yet_.  As far as 
we could tell, there wasn't much we needed to do, but that was mostly because 
the situation hadn't been investigated fully.  We suspect there won't be all 
that much work.

.act.duim: Richard and Tucker will investigate the state of DUIM for the MM 
product.
Richard and Tucker have talked to Scott and the belief is that it will be 
possible to use DUIM.


MINUTES


Machine Resources

.mr.mail: Richard has sent mail about machine purchasing to mm-quartet and 
others.  .mr.ultra: Mark is keen to see the UltraSPARC purchase.  .mr.alpha: 
George suggested perhaps an Alpha instead to fit in with Dylan.  .mr.64: Mark 
agrees that another 64 bit machine would be nice, but perhaps not an Alpha - 
perhaps an SGI.  Mark will report back about what other QA groups requirements 
are (EP) (.act.equipment.qa) and Richard will speak to Khalid about reuse of 
old equipment and purchasing (.act.equipment.mm).


MM/Dylan Test Suites

.test.none: Jo reports back that Dylan group won't provide test suites for 
benchmarking MM performance -- they will benchmark by interactive performance 
later in the development cycle.  .test.some: Ask Dylan group to ship Dylan to 
MM as is for performance tuning (.act.dylan.tests).


MM Book

.book.def: The goals and requirements are being drafted and Tucker is planning 
the content.  Richard to make sure the plans that Tucker has end up in the spec 
(.act.book.spec).  Jo to write paragraph about book and send to senior 
management for their approval (.act.book.approval).

.book.prod: Can the book prospectus mention the product?  There's an issue of 
confidentiality for the product and also external commitment to delivering the 
product.  It beefs up the prospectus if the product is mentioned.  Clive thinks 
it's not a good idea.  We can't mention the MM product.

.book.demo: Can we expect a demo version of the product to ship on a CD at the 
back of the book?  We can't commit to that in the book prospectus at the 
moment, but this doesn't preclude doing it in the end.


Documentation

.doc.plan: Leah has an outline for the first manual and the doc plan is being 
written with an overall design for doc already drafted.  .doc.review: There 
will be a review of the doc plan this week and Leah will come to UK in a couple 
of weeks time.  .doc.sched: Thereafter we need a doc schedule.  .doc.mps: We 
are planning to work on reference documentation for the MPS interface _first_, 
but the plan is for the entire user documentation set.  This early 
documentation  will be used internally by other groups using MM (EP, Dylan) 
which should reduce MM support effort to internal groups.

.doc.matrix: Leah wants an audience/experience matrix for the MM product from 
Clive.  Richard will fax Jo and Clive the example that Leah sent him (.act.fax).


Tools Developer

.dev: Richard interviewed Nick Dalton who would be excellent/ideal.  May be 
available part-time until September and full-time from then.  Richard should 
speak to Jo Bragger and maybe George as well (.act.dalton).


Rival Product Purchasing

.rival: Clive will prod the order for rival products to see if he can move it 
again and report back at next meeting (.act.rival).


Next Meeting

.next: 1997-03-03 15:00 UTC


ACTIONS

.act.equipment.qa: Mark will report back about what other QA groups 
requirements are (EP).

.act.equipment.mm: Richard will speak to Khalid about reuse of old equipment 
and purchasing.

.act.dylan.tests: Jo to ask Dylan group to ship Dylan to MM as is for 
performance tuning.

.act.book.spec: Richard to make sure the plans that Tucker has end up in the 
spec. 

.act.book.approval: Jo to write paragraph about book and send to senior 
management for their approval.

.act.book.prospectus: Richard to tell Tucker (Andrew?) that we can't mention 
the product in the book prospectus and we can't commit to shipping a CD with 
the product with the book at the moment.

.act.fax: Richard will fax Jo and Clive the audience/experience matrix example 
that Leah sent him.

.act.dalton: Richard should speak to Jo Bragger and maybe George as well about 
Nick Dalton.

.act.rival: Clive will prod the order for rival products to see if he can move 
it again and report back at next meeting.

