         NOTES FROM MEETING WITH UNIVERSITY OF KENT, 1997-02-12
                         meeting.ukc.1997-02-12
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-02-12

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> talked on the phone to Richard Jones 
<R.E.Jones@ukc.ac.uk> to investigate further collaboration between MM and the 
University of Kent.

.auth: This contact was authorized by George Cleland <glc> on 1996-10-01 10:42 
in private mail to Richard.

.form: These notes were typed in while I talked on the phone, in response to 
comments in Richard Jones' original mail to Richard.


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.summary: Richard Jones is interested in:

  1. a UK memory management workshop this summer in which Harlequin could 
participate,

  2. collaborative work, exchanging real-world problems for effort,

  3. seminars at UKC about various Harlequin areas, including EP and HIS.

I would like to visit him in Kent during the next month.


NOTES

RB = Richard Brooksby, RJ = Richard Jones.

Richard Jones wrote:

> There is a fairly small community in the UK that is interested in memory
> management in general and in GC in particular. It would be worthwhile
> developing this community and in particular fostering links between industry
> and academia.

RJ: Number of people in the UK which have an iterest, often an aside, kent 
Glasgow, people with functional languages at York and Manchester, and it would 
be good to pull them together to talk more about what we're doing.  Peter 
Dickman and I are trying to get money out of EPSRC to fund a small workshop 
aimed at postgraduates (advertised along the lines of here's a workshop for 
EPSRC funded postgraduates as development/training).  We'd need to determine 
how much interest there would be.  Maybe we could get some invited speakers 
along.

RB: What would be the title or goal of the workshop?

RJ: To generate interest in MM, and to let everyone know that there are other 
people working in the area.  Try and raise the profile of this area of work in 
this country.

RB: We would almost certainly want to be involved.

RJ: We did intend to talk to you.  (By the way, Insignia has some interest in 
MM.)

RB: When would the workshop be?

RJ: Don't know yet.  Summer would be most convenient.

RB: This summer?

RJ: Yes, I don't see why not.  We need to talk more to the EPSRC then put out 
some feelers to various people, and see how much interest we get, then take it 
from there.

RB: Where would it be?

RJ: Depends on interest.  Glasgow and Kent are both extremeties.

RB: How about Cambridge?

RJ: Possible.  We'd have to decide.  We wondered if we should broaden it -- 
there are people in Paris, in which case Canterbury is "central".

RB: We can come along and talk about how we see the industry and strategic 
directions, and give feedback, but I'm not sure how much technical information 
we could reveal.

RJ: Concerning the web pages.  You've put a lot of work put in.  What's the aim?

RB: [Publicity, contact with outside world, it had fairly low cost, etc.]

RJ: A fair degree of overlap between our sites.  I wondered if there was any 
scope for doing some collaboration?  I know you have a link across, but that 
seems to be the lowest level.  Perhaps more cross-links.  Things like using 
each other's logos to go to each other's site.  An area we should keep on top 
of.

RB: We could at least keep each other informed of changes?

RJ: You could consider keeping an archive of the gc mailing list in some nice 
form.

RB: We might want to set up something something broader than GC -- an MM 
mailing list.  We would talk to GC mailing list about this.

Richard Jones wrote:

> I would be very interested in discussing the work we are each doing in this
> area to see if we really do have common interests that could be developed to
> mutual benefit.

> More specifically, I was impressed by Paul Wilson's talk in Scotland last
> year. I think the case for doing more precise measurement of the way real
> programs actually behave in terms of memory management is a strong one. I
> haven't found any in the GC area that's been done really convincingly (I look
> forward to the results of Paul's students PhD which I understand will do this
> for C++).

RJ: Lots of papers on GC have lack of measurements.  General tendency in all 
sorts of areas.  GC feels a bit better than that.  Wilson's paper at Kinross 
was striking for criticising statistically based measurements.  Sensible.  If 
there is any avenue for us to do joint work to keep each other informed.  I 
have Postgrads and there may be projects that are real-world interests.  More 
successful and more interesting than purely academic.

RB: I agree.  My talk at IWMM '95 ("What's the point?") said the same things.

RJ: Does anyone know how programs behave?  Distributed GC is a case in point.  
A lot of it is never implemented.

RB: Similar points came up at IWMM92 as well.  We believe in measurement.

RJ: Paul's PhD student was going to produce measurements, but I never heard any 
more.  (See .act.wilson.student.)

RB: I wonder if we could support his tenure application in some way?  (See 
.act.wilson.tenure.)

Richard RJ:

> At the risk of jumping on bandwagons, the Java phenomenon shows few signs of
> stumbling. However its GC is not outstanding by all accounts. There's scope
> here although I don't know if Harlequin has Java interests.

RJ: UKC is adopting Java as a primary teaching language.

RB: There may be interest for us in pursuing Java GC.

RJ: This is just the sort of thing we could collaborate on.

RB: Yes, I believe so.

RJ: That's where we can help each other.  You can provide interesting projects 
and we can provide man-power.  It helps us to have involvement with industry.  
The sort of things are PhD or MSc sized projects, or projects that could be 
forward to EPSRC for funding, when Harlequin would commit a certain level of 
input.  Thing that look like money on paper but aren't really, such as a 
student coming to work at Cambridge.

RB: Could be project in Java GC or measurement?

RJ: Yes.

Richard Jones wrote:

> More generally, there may be projects of interest to Harlequin
> that could be investigated by PhD students at Kent, possibly as CASE
> studentships. Kent also has active seminar programmes, and people from
> Harlequin might be interested in giving a seminar. We also run sandwich
> courses -- might you be interested in providing placements?

RJ: We're also interested in visits and seminars in all fields.  Also in areas 
such as EP.  We like to have an active seminar programme in a range of areas.  
The laboratory has functional programming, theoretical CS, and electronic 
publishing group.  Also distributed systems and smaller groups in parallel and 
numerical stuff and information systems: geographic, business process.

RB: MM is very interested in soft eng process and info sys.

RJ: We're working on that right now and reorganizing our courses.  Come and 
give a seminar.  We're always interested in returning graduates come and talk 
to the lab.

RJ: Our seminar slot is end of Tuesday afternoons.

RB: I'd like an informal visit first, I think.  (See .act.visit.)

RJ: OK.  I'm trying to keep Thursdays and Fridays free for research and talking 
to people.  So any Thursday or Friday.  Make some suggestions and I'll tell you 
what I can do.


ACTIONS

.act.web: Gavin to think about changes and collaboration.

.act.wilson.student: Richard'll ask Paul Wilson whether his PhD student has any 
measurement results.

.act.wilson.tenure: Richard will investigate ways in which Harlequin might 
support Wilson's tenure application.

.act.collab: Richard will discuss possibilities for collaboration with senior 
management.

.act.visit: Richard will arrange a visit to UKC on a Thursday or Friday if 
given the go ahead by senior management.


METRICS

Meeting time: 41 minutes
Write-up time: 18 minutes

