             VERSION "HONEYBEE" OF THE DYLAN MEMORY MANAGER
                         version.dylan.honeybee
                             incomplete doc
                           richard 1997-07-02

SPECIFICATION

.spec: This specification is based on req.dylan(6).

req.dylan(6).fun.obj.alloc                critical    yes
req.dylan(6).fun.obj.recycle              critical    yes
req.dylan(6).fun.obj.recycle.wrapper    nice no
req.dylan(6).fun.obj.still                essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.obj.pin                  essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.misc.alloc               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.root                     essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.root.table               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.root.fmt                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.root.thread              essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.measure.tools            optional    no
req.dylan(6).fun.valid.if                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.valid.obj                essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.weak                     essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.weak.tables              essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.weak.index               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.weak.slot                nice        no
req.dylan(6).fun.final                    essential   yes
req.dylan(6).fun.final-weak               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).attr.test-suite              essential   not applicable -- no test 
suite
req.dylan(6).attr.control                 optional    needs defining, but no
req.dylan(6).attr.tune.effort             nice        undefined
req.dylan(6).attr.capacity                nice        yes, for total<1Gb
req.dylan(6).attr.obj.max                 nice        yes, for size<1Gb
req.dylan(6).attr.debug                   unknown     undefined
req.dylan(6).attr.debug.find              nice        undefined (but no, not 
really)
req.dylan(6).attr.rel.mtbf                optional    undefined
req.dylan(6).attr.adapt                   nice        undefined
req.dylan(6).attr.time.boot               optional    no
req.dylan(6).attr.time.pause.max          optional    no
req.dylan(6).attr.time.hash.define        essential   yes
req.dylan(6).attr.time.hash.miss          essential   yes
req.dylan(6).attr.time.thread.reg         unknown     no
req.dylan(6).attr.time.thread.dereg       unknown     no
req.dylan(6).attr.time.ffi.in             nice        no, about 50 instructions
req.dylan(6).attr.time.ffi.out            essential   yes
req.dylan(6).attr.time.weak.slot          unknown     undefined
req.dylan(6).attr.time.misc.approx        optional    yes
req.dylan(6).attr.space.boot              optional    ????to be decided
req.dylan(6).attr.space.struct            essential   yes
req.dylan(6).attr.space.accuracy          nice        undefined
req.dylan(6).attr.flex                    unknown     undefined
req.dylan(6).dc.env.thread                essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.env.multi.i4                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.env.multi.other            nice no
req.dylan(6).dc.env.ambig                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.env.gc.boehm              nice        no
req.dylan(6).dc.env.self                  optional    ???? to be decided
req.dylan(6).dc.env.malloc                essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.env.hog                   essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.env.odi                   unknown    *unknown, probably no
req.dylan(6).dc.env.coop                  nice        no
req.dylan(6).dc.env.load                  optional   *unknown, probably yes
req.dylan(6).dc.link.object               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.link.single               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.link.c.header             essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.link.c.macro              essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.link.no-crt               optional    yes
req.dylan(6).dc.plat.nti4mv               critical    yes
req.dylan(6).dc.var.ro                    essential   yes
req.dylan(6).dc.var.dp                    essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.obj                     critical    yes
req.dylan(6).prot.obj.read                critical    yes
req.dylan(6).prot.obj.write               critical    yes
req.dylan(6).prot.rehash                  essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.debug                   essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.ffi.exc                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.ffi.access              essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.abort                   essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.stack-overflow          essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.error                   optional    yes
req.dylan(6).prot.exc.dylan               essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.fail-alloc              essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.consult                 nice        no
req.dylan(6).plan.int.effort              essential   yes (already done)
req.dylan(6).plan.avail.1                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).plan.avail.2                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).plan.avail.3                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).plan.avail.4                 essential   yes
req.dylan(6).plan.avail.categorize        essential   yes
req.dylan(6).plan.port.fun                unknown     yes
req.dylan(6).plan.port.full               unknown     yes
req.dylan(6).counter.feedback             nice        -
req.dylan(6).counter.test.suite           nice        -
req.dylan(6).prot.thread.reg              essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.thread.dereg            essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.obj.access              optional    yes
req.dylan(6).prot.tls                     essential   yes
req.dylan(6).prot.atomic                  essential   yes

