             NOTES FROM THE MM QUARTET MEETING, 1997-05-27
                       meeting.quartet.1997-05-27
                               draft doc
                           richard 1997-05-27

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Nick Levine <nick>, Chris Cox <chrisc>, and 
Leah Bateman <lmb> met to discuss MM project issues.


AGENDA DOCUMENTS

.agenda: Nick suggested that a meeting "agenda document" be created so that 
people could edit the next meeting's agenda beforehand.  Richard will set one 
up at the end of this meeting (.act.agenda).


LEGAL PROTECTION

.prot: Richard reports that the printing of the Memory Management Information 
System is now complete and will be shipped to Sharon Vangundy.  Purchase of 
rival products can now go ahead.  Richard will ask Tucker to put together the 
orders (.act.rival).


GROUP MANAGEMENT

.gm: There has been no response to the web advert and no useful response from 
agencies.  Chris asks, did we advertize in uk.jobs.offered?  Richard will 
investigate (.act.ukj).  Nick says the web job advert is too specific 
(.act.edit).


DOCUMENTATION

.doc.lmb: Leah reports that she and Andrew Schwartz have concluded that two new 
writers are needed in addition to themselves to get HiNTs documentation 
together for the deadline, which is September 2nd.  These documentors will need 
a month's ramp-up anyway.  She says that she will not remain on HiNTs after 
this date but could give no guarantee.

.doc.four: MM will have lost _four_ months of documentation, not three as 
previously stated.

.doc.delay: This delay seriously lowers the probability of getting a product 
out this financial year.  Perhaps we will be able to release by next June.

.doc.new: Leah estimates that a new documentor would take at least six months 
to produce a first draft.

.doc.richard: A new documentor will also take a up a lot of Richard's time as 
well, because he would have to train him for at least the first month.

.doc.nickb: Lack of documentation for EP means that Nick Barnes will need to 
spend more time working with EP developers, delaying both the product, and 
Dylan performance (.act.doc).

.doc.nick: Nick will speak to George again.  He will also flag the delay with 
EP.


QUESTIONNAIRE

.q: Chris has had one response to the questionnaire, which was unsurprising.  
He is hoping for around 100.  He has ordered software which will help analyse 
the results.

.q.rod: Chris will ask Rod Moyse to cast an eye over the questionnaire 
(.act.rod).


RIVALS

.rivals: Chris hasn't looked at the rival products to determine whether 
analysis.product.comp.analysis is still valid.  He will do so (.act.rivals).


NAMING

.naming: We will have another naming meeting on 1997-06-03.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT SCOPE

.scope: Nick has taken up MM/ML product management.  He will deal with incoming 
requests from now on.  He intends to take up the MM/Web product next, and will 
meet Gavin today (.act.web).


PRODUCT LICENSING

.lic: Nick has sent the product licensing proposal to senior management and 
legal and had no response yet.  Richard suggests prodding them again.  Nick 
will do so (.act.prod).  We will proceed with the plan until we hear otherwise.


PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS

.req.review: Richard is currently reviewing the product requirements to check 
Nick's recent edits (.act.req).

.req.ten: Chris would like ten levels of priority on requirements with data fed 
in from the questionnaire results.  Richard suggested this in addition to, 
rather than instead of, the requirement categories.


MISCELLANEOUS

.incentive: Chris wondered about incentive schemes for programmers.  Richard 
will ask what might be appropriate, but warned that small incentives would have 
a negative effect on morale (.act.incentive).


ACTIONS

.act.agenda: Richard to set up agenda document.  [Done, see 
meeting.quartet.1997-06-09. richard]

.act.rival: Richard will ask Tucker to put together orders for rival products.

.act.ukj: Richard will investigate whether the Group Management job was posted 
to uk.jobs.offered.

.act.edit: Richard and Nick will edit down the job advert for Group Management 
to make it less specific.

.act.web: Nick will meet Gavin Matthews to pick up the MM/Web product.

.act.prod: Nick will prod legal to get a response concerning the MM Product 
licensing plan.

.act.doc: Nick will speak to George concerning the consequences of lack of 
documentation effort and try to get some conclusion.

.act.rod: Chris will show the questionnaire to Rod Moyse and ask him for his 
opinion.

.act.rivals: Chris will look at rivals to see whether 
analysis.product.comp.analysis is still valid.

.act.req: Richard will review req.product to check Nick's recent edits.

.act.incentive: Richard will investigate and suggest possible incentives which 
might make developers more productive.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1997-06-09 15:00 BST

