      NOTES FROM THE MEMORY MANAGEMENT PRODUCT MEETING, 1996-10-07
                       meeting.product.1996-10-07
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-10-07

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard>, Richard Tucker <rit>, Alex Parnes <alexp>, 
Clive Harris <cliveh>, Jo Blishen <jblishen>, Ken Jackson <kenj>, and Wendy 
Phillips <wendyp> met to discuss Memory Management Product progress.


QA

Mark: Richard [Tucker] will be here part time (12 hours per week -- 1 and 2 
days on alternate weeks) until the end of the year, then full-time from 
January.  He's working with the MM Group and will give input to quartet through 
me.  He's testing and co-ordinating the testing of the MM product in its 
various incarnations, both stand-alone and in other products [ScriptWorks, 
Dylan, etc.].

Alex: Richard, would you like to introduce yourself?

RIT: I'm finishing my thesis in natural language processing.  I've just started 
last week, and so far I've just been reading around and making initial plans 
about what to test and how to test it.  It'll become clearer as time goes on.

Mark: Having a dedicated QA resource makes this [MM] a blessed product.

RIT: It's interesting work, because there are a number of products and planning 
to test them means talking to many people.  I also want to avoid redundancy 
between testing in the different products.

Mark: That is an interesting challenge.

Alex: Welcome again, Richard.


PRODUCT MANAGEMENT

Alex: As you may be able to tell from her presence here, Jo Blishen has a 
special interest in this product, but I cannot make any announcement.  There 
has been some discussion between George, Alex, etc. but I'm stopping short of 
making any announcement.


COMPETITIVE PRODUCTS

Richard: Clive, any progress?

Clive: Nothing acquired yet.  Jo has to approve things, and he's busy.

Alex: What is it that requires approval?

Clive: $1500 for competitors.

Alex: Please submit to me instead.

Clive: OK.

Alex: I will approve and also involve George (.act.approve).


JAVA


DEVELOPMENT

Richard: Not very much to report.  We now have project plans in plan.dylan and 
plan.epcore respectively.  Hugo (Core RIP Group) has been assigned to RIP 
adaptations to MM, so we are fast approaching equivalence, and a releasable 
ScriptWorks with the MM in place.


DOCUMENTATION

Ken:  We have interviewed a writer, and are close to making an offer.  If that 
works out then that frees up a resource for MM.  Leah Bateman would be freed 
from Watson and HCIS work.  I expect to hear this week on the job offer.  There 
is no backup plan, so I hope it works out.  Other people involved are 
enthusiastic about the offer, so it has a good chance.  This writer would be in 
Manchester.

Richard: What will be the lag between hiring and documentation starting on MM?

Ken: The new hire is available very quickly.  There'll be some transition work, 
but MM documentation could begin very quickly.

Richard: Within a week or two of the new hire?

Ken: Yes.


TOOLS DEVELOPER

Richard: Two new candidates now with HR.  I told Jo Bragger that I was 
particularly interested in Peter Benie for MM tool development, but she's 
looking around the company for suitable positions.

Alex: You should continue to chase those applications.

Richard: I shall (.act.rec).


WEB PAGES

Richard: We are in the late stages of preparing web pages to promote Harlequin 
as a centre of expertise in the field of memory management.  I will mail 
details so everyone can take a look.  (.act.web.mail).

Alex: Let's all take an action to look at those pages (.act.web.look).


ACTIONS

.act.rec: Richard will chase the applications of Peter Benie and Ian Jackson.

.act.web.mail: Richard will mail round information about the MM web pages to 
facilitate .act.web.look.

.act.web.look: Everyone will take a look at the proposed memory management web 
pages.

.act.approve: Alex will approve Clive's expenditure on competitive products.


NEXT MEETING

.next: 1996-10-18 15:00 BST

