              SUMMARY OF SIXTH MM/LFCS MEETING, 1995-08-21
                        meeting.lfcs.1995-08-21
                               draft doc
                           richard 1995-08-21

INTRODUCTION

David Jones, David Moore, and Richard Brooksby met with Rod Burstall, John 
Longley, and Healf Goguen in order to further the MM/LFCS collaboration.


AGENDA

1. Miscellaneous chat
2. Review of John's paper "An ML Model of Generic Garbage Collection" 
   (paper.longley3)
3. Discussion of Richard's ML GC and its contribution towards MM design
4. Discussion of Rod's Lego proof of the simple GC algorithm
5. Assessment of progress and review of goals
6. John's plans for the next two weeks
7. Farewell to John
8. Healf's interests for the next year
9. Planning


NOTES

This was John Longley's last MM/LFCS meeting, since he is leaving LFCS 
shortly.  He had written a paper describing the ML implementation of his 
generic GC model which he brought to the meeting.  The general framework paper 
(paper.longley2) remains unfinished, but is still useful as a source for work 
in the next year.  This meeting was therefore a turning point, with John 
leaving and Healf joining.  We used the opportunity to review progress so far 
and look ahead to the future.


MISCELLANEOUS

- This is John's last meeting.
- Healf starts at LFCS on about the 15th October.
- Rod thinks it would be good to produce a one-page progress report.
- Rod would like to involve James McKinna and Paul Jackson at LFCS.  Should 
they sign NDAs?


REVIEW OF JOHN'S PAPER (paper.longley3)

john: This is mainly a brain-dump of my ideas so that it can be passed on to 
another person such as Healf.  The ratio of thoughts to lines of code is high.

richard: That's a good sign.

john: This is intended to be of interest to groups interested in ML and ML 
applications, in abstraction and methodology (specification), and in garbage 
collection.

richard: You could mention this on the front of the paper.

rod: I'm giving a talk in Norway at ADT conference (19th to 23rd September), 
for algebraic specification people.  Can we clear this paper in time?

richard: I will look in to it.

drj: We'll look for possibly sensitive stuff as we go through.

john: When trying to write this I discovered I didn't know how to document 
programs -- it seems very verbose.

richard: Are there any books on this subject?

john: It's a more-or-less complete English specification of each module which 
could be the basis for formal developments.  I'm worried that people might not 
appreciate the depth of information.

richard: You could mention the amount of effort put in.

john: A lot of issues that arise through writing MLGC are also found through 
John's implementation.

richard: I suggest that you add a catalogue of modules and a one-page diagram 
to stare at while reading through the detail.  The catalogue should briefly 
state the purpose of each module.

john: I hope to finish a description of all five levels, then maybe some stuff 
about combinations of levels.

[Note: Markers are scan pointers and implement grey sets.]

[Pause for 10 minutes to read paper.]

Richard noted some possibly sensitive points: [use as input to ideas list?]
  p1  s1   Mention of MM team and MM staff
  p1  s1   Motivations of Harlequin
  all      "Our" and "we" doesn't necessarily include Harlequin
  p2  s1   para. 10 mentions multiple policies [maybe contentious]
  p2  s1   para. 11 mentions multiple levels
  p5  s2.2 "language independent MM system"
  p5  s2.2 Discussion of "full MM system"
  p6  s2.2 last line speaks of concurrent GC
  p10 s2.2 Mentions levels of aggregation

drj: Could write more about levels, a few more words about each level.  More 
earlier about all of them.  Not clear where roots would appear, for example.  
(john: Root is argument at very top level.)  Because there's not detail about 
the top three levels it's difficult to say anything about them.

dsm: Why are they "levels"?

john: They really are levels of signature/functor structure.

dsm: p2 mentions three essential kinds of operation, including deletion of 
memory cells -- is that necessary?

richard: Not deletion operation, but operations concerned _with_ deletion.

rod: The whole paper is blob 2 on page 2?  Could be clearer.

john: I could number them, etc.

healf: Structure makes this a bit unclear.

dsm: WORD_MEMORY pins things down to specifics a bit too much.

drj: Might need locking for concurrent GC.

richard: Copy shouldn't be atomic.

[Richard goes through sensitive issues.]

dsm: How complete is the code?

john: levels 1, 2, 3, and 5 exist, but only old versions of level 4.  It 
doesn't actually all run together.  There are two versions of some stuff to 
illustrate contrasts.

rod: This assumes that everybody knows what the algorithm is anyway.  It could 
do with an overview of the process.  john: It's more of a brain-dump.

rod: As a paper it would need an overview.  The description is bottom-up, 
perhaps top-down might be better.

drj: The most familiar concepts come first this way.

rod: The algorithm is at the top, though.

dsm: Perhaps this can be done by expanding the overview.

rod: Could generate cross-references using NuWeb.

[Discussion of NuWeb.]

[Adjourn for lunch.]


RICHARD'S ML GC

Richard gave a brief overview of the ML GC and described how it has contributed 
to the design of the AMC collector, and has helped to resolve the design of the 
representation of greyness which works in with concurrent collections.


LEGO MODEL

rod: We have a semantics for a basic imperative language adequate to describe 
the abstract garbage collector, with mutator intervention built into the 
semantics.

dsm: Expresses incrementality and works in the presence of the mutator.

rod: We could walk through the Lego stuff next time.


ASSESSMENT OF PROGRESS AND REVIEW OF GOALS

  goal.lfcs.suggest: Suggest ways in which the Memory Management Project might
                     better meet its requirements.

richard: ML for design may well pay.  We need to measure.

  goal.lfcs.clarify: Clarify understanding of the Memory Management System.

richard: Multi-level graph has done this, as has the ML.  This has influenced 
design.

  goal.lfcs.comms1: Improve communication within the Memory Management
                    Project.

richard: Early days, but the ML may have helped somewhat with communicating 
design to ptw.  It may kick in later.

  goal.lfcs.process: Provide suggestions for improving the processes used in
                     engineering the Memory Manager by the application of
                     formal techniques.

richard: Using ML in the design is one suggestion.  The Lego hasn't really 
started.

dsm: It looks good so far, and it certainly helps to think about it.

  goal.lfcs.comms2: Improve communication between Harlequin and LFCS.

john: It's improved comms between us and you in a non-superficial way.  I 
understand what we're trying to get at more easily than before.  It would be 
nice to think of a way of capitalizing on that more generally.

rod: It could be that me having lunch with people and talking with various 
people spreads the word.  Mentioning it makes people interested.  Perhaps one 
of you could give a talk about Harlequin to people at the lab.

richard: I could prepare a presentation based on the recruitment stuff for the 
milk-round.

rod: Real ideas have been passed back and forth.

richard: Could get more collaborations started.

rod: Don Sanella is interested.  David Aspinall is also interested, and might 
like to visit the CL anyway.  What could he do in a few days?

richard: We could enumerate things at both ends and see where we can make 
connections.

rod: Could get Benjamin Pearce to talk about Pict.

  goal.lfcs.curiosity: Satisfy our intellectual curiosity.

rod: Stimulated but not satisfied yet.

john: Maybe this should be "stimulate" not satisfy.

rod: How about "indulge".

  goal.lfcs.formal: Demonstrate the usefulness of formal techniques,
                    especially type-theoretic approaches.

rod: Not much impact on this yet.  A bit sad, but on the other hand it means we 
didn't have a fixed agenda when we started.

richard: We could identify problems and attempt to prove them during the next 
year.

  goal.lfcs.healf: Improve Healf's knowledge of practical software engineering
                   and practical applications of formal techniques.

healf: That will come up, I suspect.

  goal.lfcs.publish: Publish academic papers to advance John and Healf's
                     academic careers, and to improve the standing of LFCS and
                     the image of Harlequin.

john: This paper (paper.longley3) will be publishable.

rod: LFCS needs credit for doing industrially useful work, and that's very 
important.  The lab needs this credit to get support.  It's really important 
that we get this.

richard: We could add an explicit goal to do this or change goal.lfcs.formal to 
slant towards LFCS rather than formal techniques in general.

rod: For EC money we need applicability to a company's particular goal, not 
just for usefulness in general.

  goal.lfcs.share: Share the insights and benefits gained by the collaboration
                   with the technical community, insofar as this does not
                   compromise Harlequin's competitive advantage.

richard: This paper (paper.longley3) or a derived paper is starting to do 
this.  Rod's talk in Norway might also do that.

rod: We're bringing together two cultures with different purposes but knowing a 
lot of the same things.

  goal.lfcs.system: Provide feedback to the design of Lego and other
                    theorem-proving systems.

richard: None of that so far.

john: We've discovered some bugs, but haven't told the implementors.  Should 
tell him more formally.

healf: I'd like to try some of this with Coq.

  goal.lfcs.verify: Provide a viable starting point for verification of the
                    Memory Management system.

richard: We've done this.

Conclusion

richard: We should add something about applicability to industry.  We want 
results which can be used by LFCS to justify funding or whatever.  What kind of 
thing do you want?

rod: Verification of the ML model would be good.  Publishable papers.  Could 
_you_ write something about us being useful to you.

richard: A sort of testimonial?

rod: Yes, something like that.  Harlequin authorship on papers would be good.

richard: Timing?

rod: OK for a couple of years, but this would help quite a lot.  Honest talk 
about the collaboration rather than the technicalities would be useful.  Talk, 
then paper by 1st December.

richard: Submit a script and we can rubber-stamp it.


JOHN'S WORK

John will try to finish off paper.longley3 in the next couple of weeks.


HEALF'S WORK

Healf expressed great interest in ML modelling of the MM, and in verification 
of that model.  We'll look for methods for conceptually linking the ML and the 
C together to give confidence in the implementation.  We may be able to develop 
a method for doing this (a process) and publish that -- something which would 
greatly contribute towards goal.lfcs.formal, goal.lfcs.publish, and maybe 
goal.lfcs.suggest.  Healf is also interested in doing a search for existing 
techniques in this area.

healf [verbatim]: I'm interested in using ML as an interface between C and a 
verification.  That seems really attractive to me.  At the same time, doing 
some sort of literature search for what industrial techniques there are for 
this kind of thing, documentation of the programs, etc.  I'm quite interested 
in that whole field in fact.

richard: A process could be developed which both justified LFCS and Lego.


ACTIONS

 1. Write up and circulate meetings notes (richard)
 2. Organize travel etc. for next meeting (richard)
 3. Find out about limitations on NDAs (richard)
 4. Prepare presentation for LFCS based on recruitment talks (richard)
 5. Think about role of ML and put MLGC into InfoSys (richard)
 6. Produce outline of Norwegian for checking (rod)
 7. Finish off paper, at least in note form (john)
 8. Discuss goal to produce LFCS promotional material (richard, rod)
 9. Produce list of possible collaborations (richard, rod)
10. Send Lego sources to richard (rod)
11. Send NuWeb/LaTeX/PS of paper to richard (john)


PLANNING

Rod proposes the next meeting be on Friday 27th October in Edinburgh.  This 
will give Healf a couple of weeks to get started at LFCS.

