{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff16\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}
{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}TIMES;}{\f16\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Palatino;}{\f17\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f18\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f20\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f21\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f22\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f41\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 TIMES CE;}{\f42\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 TIMES Cyr;}
{\f44\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 TIMES Greek;}{\f45\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 TIMES Tur;}{\f46\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 TIMES Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}
{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20\cf1 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Body Text;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1317066814\listsimple
{\listlevel\levelnfc23\leveljc0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'01\u-3913 ?;}{\levelnumbers;}\f3\fbias0 \fi-720\li1440\jclisttab\tx1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1447388974}}{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1447388974
\listoverridecount0\ls1}}{\info{\title For immediate release: }{\author systems}{\operator Please Do Not}{\creatim\yr1998\mo10\dy14\hr14\min2}{\revtim\yr1998\mo10\dy14\hr17\min3}{\printim\yr1998\mo10\dy14\hr16\min24}{\version73}{\edmins80}{\nofpages3}
{\nofwords1130}{\nofchars6441}{\*\company Copy This}{\nofcharsws7910}{\vern71}}\margb860 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\ftnrestart\hyphcaps0\viewkind1\viewscale100 \fet0\sectd \pgnrestart\linex0\colsx0\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20 {\b\i\cf1 For immediate release:}{\cf1  \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 
\par \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 
\par }{\b\cf1 Contact: }{\cf1 
\par 
\par Jei Lee Chong
\par Corporate Marketing Coordinator
\par Harlequin Incorporated
\par Tel: 1 (617) 374 2514
\par Fax: 1 (617) 252 6505
\par web@harlequin.com
\par 
\par Sarah Dampier
\par Corporate Marketing Coordinator
\par Harlequin Limited
\par Tel: 44 (0) 1954 785447
\par Fax: 44 (0) 1954 785444
\par web@harlequin.co.uk
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\ri-360\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\cf1 HARLEQUIN ANNOUNCES AVAILABILITY OF MEMORY MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS 
\par Software and Consulting Services Meet High-End Automatic\line And Manual Memory Management Needs
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1 
\par }\pard \ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\i\cf1 OOPSLA \rquote 98, Vancouver, B.C.  October 20, 1998 }{\f4\cf1  \emdash  }{\cf1 
Harlequin today announced the plans to license its proprietary software technology for automatic and manual memory management in complex applications.
\par 
\par }{Memory management ranks among the most difficult problems facing software developers and often lies at the root of hard-to-find bugs and performance bottlenecks.  Harlequin\rquote 
s software and consulting can help compiler vendors, virtual machine vendors, and high-end application vendors efficiently resolve memory management problems and enhance performance and 
reliability.  With over twelve years of experience developing memory management systems for dynamic languages, Harlequin is in a unique position to provide best-of-class solutions in this technology space.
\par }{\cf1 
\par \ldblquote With the advent of Java, people have come to realize the necessity of excellent memory management tools,\rdblquote  said John Hotchkiss, director of the Harlequin Software Tools business unit.  \ldblquote 
Memory management strategy can be the determining factor in the overall performance of an application.  Harlequin is happy to be offering other vendors access to our years of experience addressing these issues.\rdblquote 
\par 
\par }{\b\cf1 Key Attributes
\par }\pard\plain \s15\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20\cf1 {Memory management solutions fall into two broad categories. Automatic memory management (also known as garbage collection) is} used by languages such as Java and {
Dylan, and greatly simplifies program structure.  Manual memory management is used to provide structured},{ efficient memory protocols for language
s such as C and C++.  Within these two broad categories, a number of technologies come into play, such as incremental collection, multi-space allocation, and transparent adaptation. 
\par }\pard\plain \ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs20 {\b\cf1 
\par }{\cf1 The Harlequin memory management system allows seamless integration of disparate memory management policies, both manual and automatic.  These are applicable to a variety of application domains, and
 can be used across PC, Macintosh and various UNIX platforms.   The memory management system also brings developers a significant performance advantage.
\par 
\par }{
\par 
\par }{\b Technology Developed for Diverse Uses
\par }{The Memory Management Toolkit is the product of Harlequin\rquote s Adaptive Memory Management Group, a team of experts who have been focused on achieving optimal memory management across the Harlequin product line
. This team has developed an adaptive framework for memory management that currently supports a diverse set of Harlequin products.  
\par 
\par For example, this framework supports both Harlequin Dylan, an object-oriented }{\cf1 programming language and development environment for the Windows operating system, and ScriptWorks}{\cf1\super \'ae}{\cf1 , the world\rquote 
s fastest PostScript Language compatible raster image processing system. Harlequin Dylan}{ primarily uses a copying, incremental, generational collection strategy for memory management. It takes advantage of the framework to optimize
 the treatment of leaf objects which are automatically detected by the compiler, decreasing the collector\rquote s scan phase. ScriptWorks uses a number of manual management strategies to manage PostScript interpretation
 objects such as display lists, font caches, and more. It can also use an automatic mark-and-sweep collector to manage Postcript language-level objects as required in the Postscript Language Level 3 specification.
\par 
\par Because this technology is the bedrock upon which other Harlequin products are founded, the company has applied rigorous software engineering procedures to ensure its quality.  It has proven itself through millions of hours of use by Harlequin clients.

\par 
\par The Adaptive Memory Management Group is currently working to apply this framework to support a Java Virtual Machine and a Java native compiler runtime.  It can also be used to provide C/C++ drop-in malloc replacements, with advanced capabilities.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b Memory Management Features, a Partial Set}{
\par The memory management system\rquote s flexible framework can be easily customized to support unique language requirements. The many approaches it supports include:
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {Manual and automatic management 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {Exact and conservative tracing
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {C}{opying, compac}{ting, and in-place collection

\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {G}{enerational and incremental collection}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {A }{proprietary technique for
 fast, compact remembered sets}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {L}{
ow- or no-overhead custom object container formats}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {F}{ast, thread-safe allocation}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {M}{ultiple  varieties of weak and final references
}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {M}{ultiple simultaneous collections}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {O}{bject "cohorts" that group objects by af
finity and management policy}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {C}{ontrolled VM footprint and management overhead}
{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {I}{
nstrumentation and telemetry for debugging and performance tuning}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {Real time collection and hard latency constraints

\par }\pard \ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\adjustright {
\par The Toolkit allows easy, controlled  migration from a manually managed memory environment to a fully automatic one while visibly improving product reliability.
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b Manual Memory Management
\par }{For developers with complex software needs who cannot use automatic memory management, Harlequin provides effective manual memory management solutions. 
\par 
\par Manual memory management facilities provided include:
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {A}{
pplying any of several different manual management policies based on object lifetime patterns}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {C}{
reating separate allocation pools for objects with different affinities}{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {P}{
rofiling and partitioning objects optimally with }{adaptive}{ tools }{
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\f3\fs20 \loch\af3\dbch\af0\hich\f3 \'b7\tab}}\pard \fi-360\li1080\ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlblt\ilvl0\ls1\pnrnot0\pnf3\pnindent1440\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\ls1\adjustright {Policy migration}{
 from manual to automatic for a group of objects}{
\par }\pard \ri-80\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {
\par 
\par By supporting a variety of manual policies and tuning, Harlequin delivers significantly better performance than can be achieved with other vendors\rquote  existing \ldblquote one size fits all\rdblquote  allocators.
\par 
\par }\pard \sb60\sa40\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\cf1 Pricing and Availability
\par }\pard \ri-360\sb60\sa40\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {Parties may license the Memory Management Toolkit as a complete product and service solution. \line }{\cf1 
To discuss licensing terms, customers should contact Harlequin directly at the following numbers:
\par }\pard \li2520\ri-360\sb60\sa40\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1 United States: 1 (617)}{ 374-2521}{\cf1 
\par United Kingdom: 44 (0) }{1223 873883}{\cf1 
\par }\pard \ri-180\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\b\cf1 Harlequin
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1 
\par }\pard \ri-180\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\cf1 Harlequin is a major provider of professional software development tools. For more than 12 years, the company has been dedicated to the development and deli
very of highly creative and effective solutions to customers\rquote  problems \emdash 
 from telecommunications software to color management technology. Harlequin has grown into a global high-technology software company with world-class expertise in intelligence analysis
, information management, software development and delivery tools, high-quality digital printing and publishing, and image sequence processing. The company has offices in the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs16\cf1 Portions of the work on Harlequin Dylan were sponsored by DARPA and the USAF Air Force Research Laboratory Rome Site  as part of the program for Evolutionary Design of Complex Software.}{\cf1 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs16\cf1 
\par Copyright \'a91998 Harlequin Group plc. All rights reserved. Harlequin is a registered trademark and
 ScriptWorks and Memory Management Toolkit are trademarks of Harlequin Group plc. Dylan is a trademark of Apple Computer Inc. Windows and Windows NT are trademarks or registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems,
 Inc. All other brand or product names are the trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. 
\par 
\par All products and specifications are subject to change. Harlequin makes no warranty and accepts no liability for any loss or damage arising from the use of information or particulars in this document.
\par 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright {\fs16\cf1 ###
\par }}
