           NOTES FROM QA MEETING WITH MARK PREECE, 1996-10-01
                         meeting.qa.1996-10-01
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-10-01

INTRODUCTION

.intro: Richard Brooksby <richard> met Mark Preece <mwp> to discuss issues 
relating Richard Tucker <rit> starting work on 1996-10-02.


EQUIPMENT

.mac: It was decided to get Richard Tucker a Macintosh initially.

.pc: It may be necessary to purchase a PC when he moves to the Hall, depending 
on the QA Group's resourcing plans (see .act.qa-resource).

.rev: If we bought a PC now it would be necessary to buy a Mac later.

.move: We recommend that Richard Tucker is not moved to the Hall before Q2 
1997, partly to make sure this purchase comes after the end of the fiscal year.


DEVELOPMENT/QA RELATIONSHIP

.indep: Mark prefers to allow his staff at work independently, and report to 
him for co-ordination rather than direction.  Quartet requires closer 
relationship with QA groups, so this situation is changing somewhat.

.report: Initially, Mark suggests that he meet with Richard Tucker on a regular 
basis in order to understand the direction and overview of his work, but 
otherwise will allow him to be self-directed.

.darwin: Concerning use of DARWIN as a channel between MM and QA, Mark has no 
opinion yet, but this sounds like a good time to investigate [i.e. early in the 
relationship].  Richard suggests we give this investigation to Richard Tucker 
when he comes on board full time.


INITIAL PLANS

.plan: Richard Tucker will be introduced to the MM projects and to the 
requirements specifications.  .goal: His task will be to verify that the 
products produced meet the requirements.  .init: Initially he will concentrate 
on functional requirements, since these are best understood.  This will give 
him a chance to get going in the limited time available until he starts 
full-time.


FUTURE RELATIONSHIP

.rel: We agreed to develop a proper formal relationship between MM and QA.


ACTIONS

.act.qa-resource: Mark will discuss QA Group resourcing plan with Alex Parnes 
<alexp>.

