                     MM/EP-CORE MEETING 1999-09-21
                       meeting.epcore.1999-09-21
                             incomplete doc
                            pekka 1999-09-21

.intro: Pekka P. Pirinen <pekka> met with Dave T. Berry <dtb> and Mike Williams 
<mikew> (by phone) to discuss the plans for the upcoming releases.

.plan: Dave reviewed the current plan: SW 5.3 needs to go to QA mid-October, so 
there's not enough time to put a entirely new MPS release in (chub), instead 
Tony had suggested a brisling patch release.

.brisling: Pekka explained that this release would be called brisling.6 and 
that there's really only one bug that needs to be fixed [request.epcore.160256: 
Assertion failure while purging the hysteresis fund] -- we are confident this 
doesn't affect the current release of SW, but it's safer to fix it.  Additional 
features to support GC (planned for chub in any case) could be put in, if they 
would be used and if schedules permit.

.brisling.time: It was agreed to press for a quick release of brisling.6.  
Building and QA will take a little over a week.  Oct 1 should be possible.

.chub.time: Tony had estimated Oct 15 for a chub pre-release, although this 
could be "risky".  This schedule will be confirmed next week.

.macos.x: Dave warned that MacOS X might be required for SW 5.3.  The MM group 
cannot do much more before they get access to a machine.  Dave will bring this 
up with the powers-that-be.

