       MPS C INTERFACE: FUNCTION MPS_ARENA_FORMATTED_OBJECTS_WALK
             symbol.mps.c.mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk
                           incomplete symbol
                             drj 1998-01-30

NAME

mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk


SUMMARY

mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk is used to iterate over all formatted objects 
in the MPS heap.


ASSOCIATED PROTOCOLS

None.


SYNTAX

mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk(mps_arena, client_step_function, 
client_step_closure_p, client_step_closure_s);


TYPE

extern void mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk(mps_arena_t,
                                             mps_formatted_objects_stepper_t,
                                             void *,
                                             size_t);


ARGUMENTS

(mps_arena_t mps_arena, mps_formatted_objects_stepper_t stepper,
 void *p, size_t s)

mps_arena in an MPS arena object.

stepper is a client-supplied function (pointer) of the right type (see 
symbol.mps.c.mps_formatted_objects_stepper_t).  This function is applied to 
every object in all formatted pools.  This function should take the argument 
list (mps_addr_t object, mps_fmt_t format, mps_pool_t pool, void *p, size_t 
s).  object is the object to which the function is being applied.  format is 
the format (an MPS format object) of the object, pool is the pool in which the 
object resides, p and s are copies of the corresponding values that the client 
passed into mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk originally.

p and s are passed into the function specified by the stepper argument whenever 
the MPS calls that function.  See mps_formatted_objects_stepper_t.


RETURNED VALUES

None.


RESOURCES

mps.h


DESCRIPTION

mps_arena_formatted_objects_walk is used to iterate over all formatted objects 
in the MPS heap.  A client-supplied function is called for every object in all 
formatted pools; the object, the format, and the pool are passed to the user 
supplied function, as well as some closure variables.

Applies stepper function to a pool-class-specific collection of objects (that 
is, the pool class determines which objects in its instances get walked).  
Typically pool classes will arrange that all validly formatted objects are 
walked.  During a trace this will in general be only the black objects, though 
the leaf pool class (LO), for example, will walk all objects since they are 
validly formatted whether they are black or white.  Padding objects may be 
walked at the pool classes discretion, the client should handle this case.


EXAMPLE

[not yet]


ERROR HANDLING

There are none.


SEE ALSO

symbol.mps.c.mps_amc_apply (the historical walker), 
symbol.mps.c.mps_formatted_objects_stepper_t(0)


NOTES





INTERNAL NOTES:

The description needs a lot of work.

