\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1985--1987, 1993--1995, 1997, 2001--2024 Free Software
@c Foundation, Inc.
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.
@c
@c %**start of header
@setfilename back-cover
@settitle GNU Emacs Manual
@include docstyle.texi
@c %**end of header
.
@sp 7
@center @titlefont {GNU Emacs Manual}
@sp 1

@quotation
GNU Emacs is much @strong{more than a text editor;} over the years, it
has expanded to become @strong{an entire workflow environment,}
impressing programmers with its integrated debugging and
project-management features.  It is also a multi-lingual word
processor, can handle all your email and Usenet news needs, display
web pages, and even has a diary and a calendar for your appointments!

Features include:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Special editing modes for @strong{27 programming languages,} including C,
C@t{++}, Fortran, Java, JavaScript, Lisp, Objective C, Pascal, Perl,
and Scheme.

@item
Special @strong{scripting language modes} for Bash, other common shells,
and creating Makefiles for GNU/Linux, UNIX, Windows/DOS, and VMS
systems.

@item
Support for typing and displaying in @strong{60 non-English languages,}
including Arabic, Chinese, Czech, Hebrew, Hindi, Japanese, Korean,
Russian, Vietnamese, and all Western European languages.

@item
The ability to:

@itemize @minus
@item
Create @strong{PostScript output} from plain-text files (special
editing modes for @LaTeX{} and @TeX{} are included).


@item
@strong{Compile} and @strong{debug} from inside Emacs.

@item
Maintain program @strong{ChangeLogs.}

@item
Flag, move, and delete files and sub-directories recursively
@strong{(directory navigation).}

@item
Run @strong{shell commands} from inside Emacs, or even use Emacs itself
as a shell (Eshell).

@item
Enjoy the use of extensive @strong{merge} and @strong{diff} functions.

@item
Take advantage of built-in support for many @strong{version control
systems,} including Git, Mercurial, Bazaar, Subversion, and CVS.

@item
And much more!
@end itemize
@end itemize

Emacs comes with an introductory online tutorial available in many
languages, and this nineteenth edition of the manual picks up where
that tutorial ends.  It explains the full range of the power of Emacs,
now up to @strong{version 27.2,} and contains reference material
useful to expert users.  It also includes appendices with specific
material about X and GTK resources, and with details for users of
macOS and Microsoft Windows.

And when you tire of all the work you can accomplish with Emacs, enjoy
the games that come with it.

@strong{About the original and principal author:}

Richard M.@: Stallman developed the first Emacs in 1976 and wrote GNU
Emacs in 1984/85.  He has received the ACM Grace Hopper Award, a
MacArthur Foundation fellowship, the Electronic Frontier Foundation's
Pioneer award, the Takeda Award for Social/Economic Betterment, and
the ACM Software and System Award, as well as several doctorates
@emph{honoris causa.}
@end quotation

@hfil
@bye

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
