.. mode: -*- rst -*-

Ring data structure
===================

:Tag: design.mps.ring
:Author: Richard Brooksby
:Date: 1996-09-26
:Status: incomplete design
:Revision: $Id$
:Copyright: See section `Copyright and License`_.


Introduction
------------

_`.source`: rings are derived from the earlier use of Deques. See
design.mps.deque.


Description
-----------

_`.def.ring`: Rings are circular doubly-linked lists of ring "nodes".
The nodes are fields of structures which are the "elements" of the
ring.

Ring node structures (``RingStruct``) are inlined in the structures on
the ring, like this::

    typedef struct FooStruct *Foo;     /* the element type */
    typedef struct FooStruct {         /* the element structure */
      int baz, bim;
      RingStruct ring;                 /* the ring node */
      float bip, bop;
    } FooStruct;

This arrangement means that they do not need to be managed separately.
This is especially useful in avoiding re-entrancy and bootstrapping
problems in the memory manager. Rings also provide flexible insertion
and deletion because the entire ring can be found from any node.

In the MPS, rings are used to connect a "parent" structure (such as a
``Arena``) to a number of "child" structures (such as ``Pool``), as
shown in `.fig.ring`_. Note the slight abuse of naming convention, in
that ``barRing`` is not called ``barRingStruct``.

_`.fig.ring`: A ring of ``Bar`` objects owned by a ``Foo`` object.



_`.fig.empty`: An empty ring of ``Bar`` objects owned by a ``Foo``
object.


_`.def.singleton`: A "singleton" ring is a ring containing one node,
whose previous and next nodes are itself (see `.fig.single`_).

_`.fig.single`: A singleton ``Bar`` object not on any ring.


_`.fig.elt`: How ``RING_ELT`` gets a parent pointer from a node pointer.



Init / Finish
-------------

_`.init`: Rings are initialized with the ``RingInit`` function. They
are initialized to be a singleton ring (`.def.singleton`_).

_`.finish`: Rings are finished with the ``RingFinish`` function. A
ring must be a singleton ring before it can be finished (it is an
error to attempt to finish a non-singleton ring).


Iteration
---------

_`.for`: A macro is used for iterating over the elements in a ring.
This macro is called ``RING_FOR``. ``RING_FOR`` takes three arguments.
The first is an iteration variable: ``node``. The second is the
"parent" element in the ring: ``ring``. The third is a variable used
by the iterator for working state (it holds a pointer to the next
node): ``next``. All arguments must be of type ``Ring``. The ``node``
and ``next`` variables must be declared and in scope already. All
elements except for the "parent" element are iterated over. The macro
expands to a ``for`` statement. During execution of the loop, the
``node`` variable (the first argument to the macro) will be the value
of successive elements in the Ring (at the beginning of the statement
in the body of the loop).

_`.for.error`: It is an error (possibly unchecked) for the ``node``
and ``next`` variables to be modified except implicitly by using this
iterator.

_`.for.safe`: It is safe to delete the current node during the
iteration.

_`.for.ex`: An example::

    Ring node, nextNode;
    RING_FOR(node, &amp;foo-&gt;barRing, nextNode) {
      Bar bar = RING_ELT(Bar, FooRing, node);
      frob(bar);
    }

_`.for.ex.elt`: Notice the idiomatic use of ``RING_ELT`` which is
almost universal when using ``RING_FOR``.


Subclass
--------

_`.elt`: ``RING_ELT`` is a macro that converts a pointer to a ring
structure into a pointer to the enclosing parent structure.
``RING_ELT`` has three arguments which are, in order: ``type``, the
type of a pointer to the enclosing structure, ``field``, the name of
the ring structure field within it, ``ring``, the ring node. The
result is a pointer to the enclosing structure.

.. note:: ``RING_ELT`` does not work for arrays of rings.


Append / Remove
---------------

_`.append`: ``RingAppend`` appends a singleton ring to a ring (such
that the newly added element will be last in the iteration sequence).

_`.insert`: ``RingInsert`` adds a singleton rung to a ring (such that
the newly added element will be first in the iteration sequence).

_`.remove`: ``RingRemove`` removes an element from a ring. The newly
removed element becomes a singleton ring. It is an error for the
element to already be a singleton.

_`.improve.join`: It would be possible to add a ``RingJoin`` operation
that joined two rings. This is not done as it is not required.


Naming
------

_`.naming`: By convention, when one structure ``Foo`` contains one
ring of ``Bar`` structures, the field in ``Foo`` is usually known as
``barRing``, and the field in ``Bar`` is known as ``fooRing``. If the
``Foo`` structure contains more than one ring of ``Bar`` structures,
then they will have names such as ``spongRing`` and ``frobRing``.


Deques
------

This section documents where rings differ significantly from deques.

_`.head`: Deques used a distinguished head structure for the head of
the ring. Rings still have a separate head structure, but it is not
distinguished by type.


Defects
-------

This section documents known defects with the current design.

_`.app_for.misuse`: It is easy to pass ``RingAppend`` and ``RING_FOR``
the arguments in the wrong order as all the arguments have the same
type. see `.head`_.

_`.check.improve`: There is no method for performing a full integrity
check. This could be added.


Document History
----------------

- 1996-09-26 RB_ Created.

- 2002-06-07 RB_ Converted from MMInfo database design document.

- 2013-05-22 GDR_ Converted to reStructuredText.

.. _RB: http://www.ravenbrook.com/consultants/rb/
.. _GDR: http://www.ravenbrook.com/consultants/gdr/


Copyright and License
---------------------

Copyright Â© 1995-2013 Ravenbrook Limited. All rights reserved. 
<http://www.ravenbrook.com/>. This is an open source license. Contact
Ravenbrook for commercial licensing options.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Redistributions in any form must be accompanied by information on how
   to obtain complete source code for this software and any
   accompanying software that uses this software.  The source code must
   either be included in the distribution or be available for no more than
   the cost of distribution plus a nominal fee, and must be freely
   redistributable under reasonable conditions.  For an executable file,
   complete source code means the source code for all modules it contains.
   It does not include source code for modules or files that typically
   accompany the major components of the operating system on which the
   executable file runs.

**This software is provided by the copyright holders and contributors
"as is" and any express or implied warranties, including, but not
limited to, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a
particular purpose, or non-infringement, are disclaimed.  In no event
shall the copyright holders and contributors be liable for any direct,
indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential damages
(including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods or
services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business interruption)
however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in contract,
strict liability, or tort (including negligence or otherwise) arising in
any way out of the use of this software, even if advised of the
possibility of such damage.**
