                 MEETING TO PLAN WEB PROJECT 1996-11-12
                         meeting.web.1996-11-12
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1996-11-12

INTRODUCTION

.purpose: The purpose of the meeting was to agree a plan for the Web project 
releases, and their requirements.

.attendees: Richard Brooksby (Richard), and Gavin Matthews (GavinM) attended, 
but Nick Barnes (NickB), and David Jones (DRJ) were in the room and made some 
contribution.

[Note that comments in square brackets do not form part of the record of the 
meeting.]


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

.summary: The web pages will probably be ready for full internal release (i.e. 
to all Harlequin employees) 1996-11-19.  They will be ready for a limited 
external release (to well known MM luminaries) 1996-12-06.  They will be ready 
for full external launch 1996-12-16.


MARKETING GOALS

.goal.mark: We first discussed some general goals of marketing MM, that we 
might later derive requirements of the MM Web pages (see .sol.web and .req.web 
below).  The marketing goals and requiements are hence those which are 
independent of the web page solution.
 
.goal.mark.business: We want to generate contacts and sales.
  
.goal.mark.image.expert: We want Harlequin to have an image of being experts.
  
.goal.mark.image.prof: We want Harlequin to have an image of being professional.

.goal.mark.prac.good: We want to promote good memory management practice (to 
increase the market).

.goal.mark.prac.our: We want to promote our own memory management practice (to 
increase our market share).



MARKETING REQUIREMENTS

.req.mark: See .goal.mark.

.req.mark.mm: Generate contacts/sales of MM product (.goal.mark.business). 
[What about consultancy?]

.req.mark.other: Generate contacts/sales for other products 
(.goal.mark.business).

.req.mark.vis: Must be visible (.goal.mark.image.*).

.req.mark.cred: Must be credible (.goal.mark.image.*).

.req.mark.tech: Must be technical (.goal.image.expert).

.req.mark.strong: Must be technically strong (.goal.mark.image.prof).

.req.mark.rel: Must be relevant (.goal.mark.business, .goal.mark.prac.*).

.req.mark.look: Must look well produced (.goal.mark.image.prof).

.req.mark.current: Must be up to date (.goal.mark.image.*).

.req.mark.useful: Must be useful (.goal.mark.prac).

.req.mark.access: Must be accessible or handy (.goal.mark.prac).

.req.mark.product: Must be consistent with MM product design 
(.goal.mark.prac.our).

.req.mark.fewer: We want to see fewer questions about malloc/GC on the net and 
fewer misconceptions (.goal.mark.prac.good).


SOLUTIONS

.sol.web: One solution to the marketing requirements is a web page reference on 
memory management.


WEB PAGE ATTRIBUTE REQUIREMENTS

.req.web: The following are the derived requirments for the web pages, together 
with some comments on measurement and satisfaction.

.req.web.hits: Generate hits on the MM pages (.req.mark.mm).  This is easily 
measured after external release, but is currently meaningless.

.req.web.feedback: Generate positive feedback (.req.mark.cred).  We have 
received some, but this will vary with the level of release.

.req.web.main: Generate contacts and sales for Harlequin (.req.mark.other). We 
can measure this by hits on the main pages.  Again this is currenly meaningless.

.req.web.find: Must be findable (.req.mark.vis).  Easily achieved for web pages.

.req.web.acc: Must be accurate (.req.mark.cred).  Could measure by errors 
pointed out in review.

.req.web.compr: Must be comprehensible (.req.mark.cred).  Again, could measure 
this by difficulties in review.

.req.web.mm: Must be within our area of technical expertise (.req.mark.tech, 
.req.mark.rel).  This is easily solved by making it about memory management.

.req.web.experts: Must be agreed by experts in the field (.req.mark.strong).  
This can be measured against papers and from .rel.beta.

.req.web.cons: Must be consistent (.req.mark.strong, .req.mark.useful).

.req.web.complete: Must be complete (.req.mark.cred, .req.mark.useful, 
.req.mark.fewer).  There is less risk involved in not meeting this requirement.

.req.web.plain: Must be plain and simple (.req.mark.look, .req.mark.useful).  
This is already met.

.req.web.browsers: Must work on "all" browsers (.req.mark.useful, 
.req.mark.access, .req.mark.vis).

.req.web.updatable: Must be updateable (.req.mark.current).

.req.web.maint: Maintenance effort must be planned and scheduled 
(.req.mark.current).

.req.web.product: Must be agreed by Mm designers as consistent with product 
(.req.mark.product).

.req.web.quote: We want to be quoted and referred to on Usenet 
(.req.mark.fewer).


WEB PAGES FUNCTION REQUIREMENTS

.fun.gloss: We must have a glossary of memory management terms.  This is in an 
advanced state of preparation and is moderately stable.

.fun.faq: We must have frequently asked questions and answers.  This is in 
preparation.

.fun.bib: We must have a bibliography of books and papers relevant to memory 
management.  This will always have potential for expansion, but what's there is 
complete, and stable.

.fun.links: We want to provide to links to other useful sites on the web.  This 
needs more links and some reorganization.

.fun.news: We want to provide news about the site and the world of memory 
management.  We need to research forthcoming conferences, etc.


PLANNED RELEASES

.rel.limited: Limited internal review.  This has already happened, and will not 
be discussed further.

.rel.internal: Broad internal review.  Planned 1996-11-19 Tuesday (before 
Richard goes on holiday), but may slip slightly.  In any case, Richard will 
have an informed basis for veto before he leaves.

.rel.beta: Limited external review, i.e. making the site externally available, 
but not publicising and linking, informing certain experts in the field.  
Planned 1996-12-06 Friday.

.rel.launch: First publicised external release, including link from main site, 
and registration with search engines.  Planned 1996-12-16 Monday.


REQUIREMENTS SATISFACTION CHART

.chart: This chart shows, for each requirement and release, what the required 
level is (by guesstimate), and what work in man-days is required to reach it.  
It also shows the estimate for the current satisfaction.  Requirement 
satisfactions are not shown where they are unchanged from the preceding 
release.  Only interesting requirements are shown.

  \ Release          |now|.rel.internal|  .rel.beta  | .rel.launch 
   \-----------------+---+-------------+-------------+-------------
  Requirement        |Met|Req      Days|Req      Days|Req      Days
  -------------------+---+-------------+-------------+-------------
  .req.web.acc       |90%|----         | 95%       ? |----          
  .req.web.complete  |75%|----         | 80%       ? | 90%       ?
  .req.web.compr     |65%| 80%       ? | 85%       ? | 90%       ?
  -------------------+---+-------------+-------------+-------------
  .req.web.experts   |80%|----         | 95%       ? |----      
  .req.web.cons      |70%| 90%       ? | 95%       ? |----
  .req.web.maint     |50%| 80%      0.5|100%       ? |----
  -------------------+---+-------------+-------------+-------------
  .req.web.product   |80%| 90%       ? | 99%       ? |----
  .fun.gloss         |95%|----         |----         |----
  .fun.faq           |20%| 80%    1.5-2| 90%       ? |----
  -------------------+---+-------------+-------------+-------------
  .fun.bib           |95%|----         |----         |----
  .fun.news          |40%| 70%      0.5| 80%        1|----
  .fun.links         |50%| 60%      0.5| 70%        1|----
  -------------------+---+-------------+-------------+-------------
  Total manpower         |      3-3.5+?|          2+?|            ?


OTHER MATTERS DISCUSSED

.solicit.news: We should solicit articles about MM news for the news page.

.research.events: We should research events and publications for the news page.

.research.repos: We should research links to respositories of papers for the 
links page.

.solicit.faq: We should solicit questions for the FAQ.

