              NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT & PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1998-12-08
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1998-12-09

MM development/product meeting, 1998-12-08, 11:30 GMT

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>.


NEWS

tony: release.web.crab has been released to QA.
pekka: ... to webmaster actually. QA is almost done, to the extent that we
do QA for web releases.

tony: release.epcore.brisling.pre is in the final stages. All
implementation work has been done. Should go to QA very soon.
rit: How soon is that?
tony: Should be sometime today. I've got a little bit of approving to do.


PLAN

{tony has handed round printouts / mailed PS files for the plan}

tony:  I had a struggle to produce the plan 'cos MS project went and
trashed all the data yesterday. So I almost believe this plan, but Pekka
has pointed out some ordering problems. The brisling release perhaps could
happen a little earlier than it does at the expense of the strategy
prototype for Dylan. I'll have a go at rescheduling that.

It's worth saying a bit about what can be read into the plan. There's been
an attempt to capture the most important taks, how long they'll take, their
relative priorities. The way in which they've been scheduled is based
mostly on guesses as to how important things will be, 'cos we don't have
any firm release dates yet. I've picked a number of milestones and assigned
different priorities for them. For each milestone, I've arranged that all
tasks on which that milestone depends inherit the priority of the
milestone. This gives us something which is almost believable in the short
term. I'd say that dates from the middle of February onwards are fairly
fictitious but nevertheless the tasks and the dependencies between them do
tell us something about our intentions.

tony: What you have here {the printout} is 4 different views. Group view
shows all the tasks that are "of interest" (not all the tasks in the plan,
just those with sufficient priority). The individual views (for pekka,
tony, drj) show all the tasks that have names associated with them. The
group plan has also got tracking information in it which is irrelevant at
the moment 'cos we're not tracking it yet. The tool has highlighted a
critical path which is task number 1 (documentation). As far as I can see
this is not relevant to our immediate priorities. I don't know exactly how
it decides what is the critical path, but it doesn't seem to be very useful.

pekka: Is it possible in MSProject to split the plan into a set of
inter-related projects.

tony: Yes. The question is would it be more helpful. I considered doing so
but I think it would make it harder to manage the plan. MS project also
allowes a hierarchy of levels within individual plans -- that might make
the information easier to view, but I haven't tried it.

daveb: The task names -- what are they?

tony: They are task names from the text document we produced before we had
MS Project. The tasks (and numbers) correspond almost exactly. Beware of
relying on the task IDs, though: they might change.

daveb: Where does the locus manager fit in to this?

tony,pekka: 28 -- I3.9 (T2) segment placement.

daveb: It's hard to see milestones.

tony: You have to look at pages 1 and 2 together. The way in which
dependencies are printed is confusing, because when two dependency lines
cross you can't tell what's happening. Although the task names are there, I
haven't provided task descriptions. They are in the original file. I could
print out the descriptions along with the tasks every week.

daveb: It would certainly useful to have the task descriptions.

rit: Why do there seem to be both start and finish dependencies to
milestone releases? E.g. brisling.

tony: I think it's just the display algorithm trying to make the diagram
clearer, but having the opposite effect.

rit: A zoomed in view of the first month or two might be useful. Show start
dates for tasks too.

tony: Are there any comments on the substance of plan so far?

drj: My tasks 45 and 46 are a bit close together. This is probably not that
important 'cos I can dink with the plan as I work it, right?

tony: I'll see what I can do.

tony: My intention is to publish another plan, say tomorrow. Any other
comments? Pekka mentiond that brisling could come perhaps a little bit
earlier.

pekka: Yes, because that's the ScriptWorks schedule.

tony: We should find out exactly whatthe schedule will be.

pekka: They'll tell us when they know.

rit: When you find out, make sure to allow suitable time for QA in the plan.

pekka: SW have been saying SW5.1 is probably end of January. (Their QA
release).
rit: Mike Cox didn't seem very certain about the January date when I spoke
to him last week.

drj: My task 93 doesn't appear on the group plan.
tony: That means it doesn't have a high enough priority.
drj: Don't worry -- it starts in March anyway.

pekka: Reviews (task 2) have been pushed back to April. Not very satisfactory.
tony: Yes. That's happened because no milestone depends on them.

pekka: Q1, Q2 should have a finish-finish dependency.
tony: Yup.

drj: We certainly don't want to start doing our reviews in April.

daveb: It's possible to define "repeating tasks" in MS Project.

drj: The plan doesn't have holiday on. I've requested quite a lot, in fact.

daveb: You can put each holiday as a task. Or you can put it in the calendar.

daveb: Are we happy with allocation of tasks to individuals?

tony: I've spoken to both drj and pekka about it.

pekka: Possibly rethink if brisling timetable becomes more urgent.


OTHER DEVELOPMENT ISSUES

tony: I don't have much to say.

+++ Current priorities

daveb: You seem to be working on assumption that EP comes first, Dylan
second...

tony: No, I've set both EP's and Dylan's next pieces of work to be the
highest priority.

daveb: But Pekka was suggesting...

tony: Yes, we're expecting brisling to happen before the Dylan strategy
prototype.

daveb: What's in these releases?

tony: Brisling will contain a locus manager and some improvements to the
AOFF pool to make it more efficient.

tony: Dylan strategy prototype will be a (slightly hacky) attempt to
arrange for collections to happen at more appropriate times. The main aim
is to get something that we can get feedback on.

daveb: Provisional dates for Dylan 2.0: April 15th 1999.

drj: On Solaris, right Dave?

daveb: Heh, heh.

daveb: Priority of Java work: I'm inclined to give it quite a high priority.

tony: It has actually been scheduled fairly actively and appears
prominently in David's tasks.

daveb: I'll talk to the Quartet about it.

daveb: I know you've been looking at Kaffe. EP2000 are shipping a JVM with
their product: JRE -- Java Reference something-or-other I think. I don't
know whether they need any performance improvements or anything. Need to
check with Tom Thomson and John Kamp to see what the situation is there.


+++ Fast Free and Microsoft.

pekka: Fast free: At the MM conference we met people from MS (Microsoft)
who were there talking about what they'd done to make their allocator work
in a server situation (multi-processor machine). They'd make some progress
but they were informally looking for more answers and asking around. I gave
them my card, and I've got the guy's card as well, and I said that we might
have something of interest. We have their paper and it explains how they
tested their efforts, so we have a fairly good idea of what we'd need to
reach to interest them. Technical analysis is that we might be goon on the
allocation side, but not on the deallocation side. We thought we'd ask
whether we should speculatively invest some effort into improving this
technology in case it would interest them. We think we could do it if we
had "fast free".

tony: Are there also issues with multi-processor environment? They're after
a large amount of concurrency, which is difficult when you're sharing out a
global resource.

pekka: Except that what they're doing is simply _manual_ management. If
they were doing GC then we'd have a lot more work. Existing AP mechanism is
quite good and working well for allocation. We haven't put so much effort
into Free.

rit: Do we think that if FastFree were implemented it might be beneficial
for ScriptWorks.

pekka: Yes, possibly, but probably not critical.

rit: I should point out that, despite frequent claims, we've never actually
measured how much benefit we get from buffered allocation.

daveb: Do we know how big an OEM contract this might be.
pekka: No. It's really hard to say anything about the commercial side of
it, 'cos these people were specialised hackers...
tony: ... from a MS research lab.
pekka: I don't think they're actively looking to buy something -- we'd need
to create the business opportunity.

tony: Perhaps the most significant thing is that MS think this is an area
worth investing in. What does that tell us?

daveb: I think for the moment we should leave it, as we have enough on our
plate. I'll make sure John Hotchkiss is aware of it, though.


+++ Relations with EP and Dylan

daveb: Managing the interface between us and EP (and possibly Dylan as
well). One idea is we do a presentation to EPcore about what our technology
is. To give them more understanding of what we do, not just strictly based
on their requirements. It might help manage the expectations that go along
with requirements.

tony: Before or after brisling.

daveb: I guess we should raise it with dtb and see if he's interested at
all. Tell him it'll affect our schedule.

daveb: I suggest it's worth our point people talking to those of other
groups regularly, e.g. once a fortnight. It's worth having a regular
meeting even if it's only five minutes sometimes. What d'you think?

p, t, rit: Yes, good idea.

daveb: I'll leave that to the point people.

rit: Who are they?
tony: Pekka for EP, Tony for Dylan.


+++ Darwin ratings

daveb: The Darwin rating stuff I mailed yesterday.
pekka: The dylan system looked more useful to us than the EP one.
drj: That was my basic opinion too.
pekka: I don't have any detailed opinions yet; I'm sure drj will at some point.

daveb: We never used the dependent tasks/people fields that SW had.
Functionality is important, visibility is important but perhaps not for MM.
pekka: I think visibility isn't the same for something that has no GUI and
is generally deep within another program. But I guess that's something
about how badly the thing is broken.

rit: Maybe separate categories for how likely you are to provoke the bug,
and how serious it is when you do.

pekka: As long as we have good definitions of how to use the ratings it'll
be ok.

daveb: Let's leave it until you've looked at it.



QA

{my notes here are very skimpy 'cos I was talking and I can't talk
and type at the same time. Sorry --rit}

rit: Preparing for testing release.epcore.brisling.pre. That meant getting
and building a recent SW source.

rit: I've been doing some experiments with CL, VMNZ arenas and with
firstFit versus lastFit in MVFF. This is using anchovy.3 in SW with not
much memory (10 MB for the rip). Results are interesting but I'm still
writing some mail about them. I'll send it out later today.

rit: I spent a little time QAing selected changes for release.web.crab. One
issue that arose from that is the policy about links to other commercial
sites. Apparently the quartet decided some time ago that we shouldn't have
any such links, but I found that there were lots. Many of them I don't see
any problem with, e.g. link to Addison Wesley from the Bibliography. I
think rather than remove all the links we need to ask the quartet to adopt
a more flexible and sensible policy on this.


WORK PRACTICES

daveb: Which mail accounts should be forwarded to drj?

drj: I said I'd quite like dsm, richard, markw. I can forward them quite
easily and still keep in touch with them

rit: I noticed that ptw's mail appears not to be forwarded anywhere.

daveb: Unless anyone wants to claim it, I guess it should go to me as well.

pekka: Can I remind people again that there's a number of old EP changes
that really should be approved. In some cases it's a formality, but
nevertheless...

rit: As pekka has pointed out to me, there are also several which still
need to be QAed.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-


Action items (did I miss some?)

daveb: mention MicroSoft to John.
daveb: ask dtb about possibility of talk from MM group
daveb: raise issue of links to commercial web-sites with the quartet
pekka: arrange regular meeting with EP
tony: arrange regular meeting with Dylan


Meeting closed at about 12:30 GMT.

