                NOTES FROM MM GROUP MEETING, 1997-01-29
                       meeting.general.1997-01-29
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-01-29

INTRODUCTION

.intro: NickB, PTW, Richard, DRJ, and GavinM met by telephone to have a brief 
Group Meeting.


NOTES

Richard: Several people have pointed out that we're missing group meetings, but 
I don't notice because I talk to everyone.  I'd like to have them regularly, 
but not when we have reviews.  Everyone should talk for five minutes.


PTW

PTW: I've been doing research on the book and trying to write the [expletive] 
outline.  I've solicited input from many people, but not the MM Group.  I 
welcome you input.

Richard: I have a mail archive filed under "advocacy".  I'll send it.

PTW: I gave a demo of our tool to Scott "Mr. DUIM" McKay.  It sounds as if 
we'll be exercising parts of the DUIM previously unexercised.  The real glitch 
is that most Dylan development is happening on SPARC Stations.

Richard: I spoke to George <<glc>> on Friday, when my brain was fried. about 
needing new machines.  His expression didn't change until I said we could wait 
till May, when he smiled.  I suggested we could have a PC/Mac hybrid.  I 
suggest Tucker does some more research on this.  They might say you can use a 
PC, plus your Duo for everything else.

PTW: I sent the blurb off for Advanced Java.

Richard: It would be useful to have more details of what you talked to Scott 
about.  Everyone seems to think it's a good idea all of a sudden.

PTW: Scott gave be a demo of his "Deuce" editor; looks emacs-style but WIMPy, 
written in Dylan.  

NickB: Using Dylan as its extension language?

PTW: I guess so.

Richard: You can put diagrams in text and so on.  It doesn't support flow.

PTW: It's one-dimensional OpenDoc.  It's probably the biggest DUIM application 
written so far.


NickB

NickB: Hugo is leaving Harlequin this week, effectively tomorrow.  I'm working 
with him to get the Trapping Release tested before then.  Troupe with "near" 
and "far" in Microsoft compilers.  Simon Green is replacing him; I've worked 
with him in Manchester.  We had a big ML meeting last week; see your mail.  

Sun have sent a patch; this doesn't fix the problem with MLWorks in all cases 
-- you still get a dirty value in a register window.  On SPARCs you get 
register windows, and there's a trap to say that registers we haven't used 
before are clean.  On UltraSPARCs they've changed the hardware implementation 
and this trap doesn't do the right thing anymore.  You get random values in 
registers.  They've filled in a lot of the holes.  Many small test programs 
pass, but the whole of MLWorks finds a bad register every so often.  Sun would 
throw up their hands at getting MLWorks, so we're trying to boil it down into a 
sufficiently complicated test case,  We don't want to keep going round this 
loop.  We have a test that checks that registers are clean and traps if not.

Richard and I (and others) are quite interested in Watt Humphrey's new books 
about the Personal Software Process.  We're looking through them.  The freshman 
stuff is a bit irritating.

Richard: It has a lot of very practical advice, like "do this and then think 
about changing it".

NickB: ... and "do this although it may seem clunky at first".

Richard: A lot of Software Engineering books are very theoretical, without 
practical examples.  I'm going to work my way though "A Disciple for Software 
Engineering".  We could either absorb it into our process, or the other way 
round.

NickB: The four-day incremental delivery cycle.  This could be experimented 
with; I've written it up.

Richard: The interesting thing about the ML meeting was that it looks like ML 
are going to call in their three man-months per year.


DRJ

DRJ: I've been faffing round with Notes a lot.  I've been tidying up a few 
loose ends for a new Dylan release, moving changes from the branch to the 
trunk.  I've been doing a survey of finalization in languages, so I can get 
Dylan's requirements straight in my head, payoffs and drawbacks.

Richard: We'd like our system to be flexible/adaptable enough to support 
different systems.

PTW: There was a message on Java list complaining that, because finalization is 
asynchronous, he never knew when his resources would be freed.  There was a 
reply from a Symbolics guy saying that, if you care, then finalization is a 
poor mechanism.  I'll send it.

Richard: What about the reply you sent to that discussion?

PTW: The guy who submitted the original question apologized for starting a 
flame war.  Another guy said it was a good summary.  Yet another said the 
hypothetical product would never be built.

NickB: Does anyone know Erik Naggum?  He has a tendency to fly off the handle.  
He's now starting posting many messages to GC-LIST.

PTW: We need to discuss my meeting with David.

Richard: The plan is to get David and Tucker working together to get the 
prototype tool useful to Dylan work.  This will improve the tool, and get David 
a trip to the US.

DRJ: It would be good to have a Dylan requirements meeting with John 
Hotchkiss.  That would need Tony and Andy Sizer.

Richard: Might need Judy as well for the ODBC thing.  What dates do we have?

DRJ: Not terribly useful at the moment, because I can't get my hands on any 
actual Dylan code.

Richard: Also event logging (Gavin), so sooner rather than latter.  How about 
March 18th for a week?  Leah will be in Alabama or Hong Kong then.  What about 
March 10th?

PTW: I'm going to take a week off to go skiing either the 3rd or the 10th.  
I'll find out which.

Richard: Let's make it March 10th if we can, or put it off till April.

NickB: we need to communicate that we'll need running Dylan code.

Richard: They have a compiler running, but say it conses too much.


GavinM

GavinM: Getting head round ML requirements.  Wrestling with process and product 
evolution.  Trying to document what our requirements are, and see how we can 
use Darwin.  Not getting round to Event Handling.  Web pages will need a steady 
stream of work.

Richard: I'll get together with you to plan your time.  The Web pages were well 
received, and George is trying to think a suitable reward.  How about a proper 
Mac?


Richard

Richard: Talking to Jo Blishen has taken up quite a lot of time.  We're having 
some trouble defining our roles.  It feels like I'm trying to get her to take 
on a lot of work, and she's trying to avoid taking it on.  We'll work it out.  
We do get on personally.

I'm looking at this personal software process.  I'm quite efficient at managing 
my time day-to-day, but I'm not doing well at managing my time long-term.  I'm 
trying to chart my time further in advance.  I may spend some more time 
"offline", say at home, to get on with tasks.  You all place demands on my 
time.  

GavinM: There are other techniques for managing interruptions, e.g. only after 
1 p.m.

Richard: Would that work?

I've been keeping a time long.  It takes 45 seconds to deal with mail on the 
first pass.  It takes 1:30 minutes for urgent mail on the second pass.  It 
takes over 2 minutes for non-urgent mail on the second pass.  It would take 
over eight hours solid to clear my "important" box.

[...]

I've had to beat off people trying to reshuffle our offices again.

I'm pleased to see the book is trundling along.  I've spoke to AndrewS about 
that.

The next thing is to get a release schedule together for Dylan.  If Darwin 
doesn't get easier soon, we may have to back off.


Locations

NickB: Em and I are interested in living in America again for one or two 
years.  I talked to George about this, and he's not entirely averse to the idea 
of moving to one of the American offices.  Jo (my son) has asthma now and it's 
apparently triggered by exposure to cold damp air.  This makes Menlo Park 
attractive.  We'll need to think about this at some length, make a decision, 
and take it to George.

PTW: Try the Phoenix office for warm dry air.

NickB: Or Utah.  I've had breakfast there.  Tangentially, I once said that, if 
the Tories get back in '97 then I'd leave the country.  So far as the Group is 
concerned, maybe I should be with Tucker on the East coast.

PTW: An excuse to visit California would be nice.

NickB: We're going to need a memory manager on the West coast sooner or later.


New People

DRJ: What happened to Sheep?

NickB: He runs the MSc in VR in the Barlett School, connected with London 
University.  He is a software engineer at heart, and has ended up running this 
huge course.  It's a lot of administration and teaching and isn't what he wants 
to do.  He wants to quit academia.  I'm trying to persuade him to join 
Harlequin because he has the skills we need.  His skills are Mac and GUI.

He sent me an addendum to his CV which covers his computing experience, and 
I'll check with him and forward it to Jo Bragger.  Jo Bragger and Jo Marks, 
both of whom I have spoken to, are both quite keen to have him.  He could do 
the MM tool, but there are twenty jobs he could go into in Harlequin.  
Richard's expressed enthusiasm to Jo Bragger can't but help.

Richard: I spoke to Dilip Sequeira.  I told him all about Harlequin, and he 
still thought he ought to apply.

I've also spoken to Gareth Rees who may or may not finish his PhD soon and is 
an expert on GUI design.  He has joint US/UK citizenship.  He has expressed an 
interest in working in Boston for months at a time.


This meeting

Richard: I hoped for five minutes each; we each spoke for ten minutes.  It's 
been good to talk.  

PTW: It was well worth the fifty minutes.


ACTIONS

.act.advocacy: Richard will send Tucker his "advocacy" mailbox.

.act.mckay: Tucker will forward notes about his meeting with Scott McKay to mm.

.act.skiing: Tucker will try to resolve the dates of his skiing holiday.

.act.event: Gavin will schedule time to work on event logging.

.act.web: Gavin will restrict web work to agreed effort.

.act.dylan: David will request runnable Dylan programs from Dylan Group.

