              TRANSCRIPT OF IRC CHANNEL #MM ON 1997-06-04
                           irc.mm.1997-06-04
                               draft doc
                           gavinm 1997-06-16

.drj.09-37-32: 'lo

.sheep.10-30-36: hello anyone about ? 

.drj.10-30-46: hi there sheep

.drj.10-30-50: how goes?

.sheep.10-30-53: ACTION irritated over train stuff

.drj.10-31-01: train stuff?

.drj.10-31-16: perhaps you shoud've bought a train company rather than a train 
ticket

.sheep.10-31-20: They changed the train times ! The moved my train forward by 
15mins

.sheep.10-31-28: so I had to wait for the next one (hour later). 

.drj.10-31-44: hmpht.  I must get a new timetable

.sheep.10-32-37: Have you tried BR's web site ? 

.drj.10-33-09: I have used railtrack's, but not BR's

.sheep.10-34-12: yes rail tracks that the one.

.drj.10-34-47: I was quite impressed

.sheep.10-35-06: Works very nicely.

.drj.10-35-13: In the past year or so I have seen an increasing number of 
genuinely useful application available on the 'net

.drj.10-58-23: sheep, how is java loglday going

.drj.10-58-39: PING 865421918

.sheep.11-05-05: I'm nearly there almost had it working on monday evening. I 
should have a 

.sheep.11-05-12: version for thursday.

.sheep.11-05-27: who else is in the pool room ? 

.drj.11-06-00: richard (not on irc?) and nickb

.drj.11-06-07: sheep, is there a design for it?

.nickb.11-10-38: Hi

.nickb.11-10-55: I should warn you that my IRC client tends to sit in the 
background somewhere.

.nickb.11-11-04: Maybe I should run a Unix client.

.richard.11-13-16: sheep?

.gavinm.11-22-56: Hello.

.sheep.11-24-00: back again 

.gavinm.11-28-17: Hello.  

.gavinm.11-28-33: Sheep, you should have gotten a packet from me.

.gavinm.11-31-22: You will be instructed what to do with it at the appropriate 
time.

.sheep.11-44-12: Gavin - Nothing was in the pigion hole this moring i will 
check before the 2.00 meeting

.nickb.11-44-38: The cherry blossom in Gorky Park is early this year, comrade.

.sheep.11-44-41: it might come over late. If not where is it electronic

.gavinm.11-47-23: MM Information: process.darwin, rule.universal, 
check.universal.cons

.gavinm.12-02-32: Sheep: I'll check that it's gone.

.gavinm.12-05-22: Sheep, Maureen says that Nick Levine took the mail over this 
morning.  If it's not in your tray now, ask him.

.gavinm.12-25-09: Spam!

.richard.12-25-23: It's very diligent.

.richard.12-25-27: If not to say tenacious.

.richard.12-25-36: Thanks.  I know.

.gavinm.12-28-09: Spam!

.gavinm.12-28-12: Spam!

.gavinm.12-28-15: Spam!

.gavinm.12-29-53: Spam!

.richard.12-40-02: Gavin: May I suggest "This channel is logged to 
irc.foo.bar.baz"?

.gavinm.12-45-52: Reminder: review in 15 minutes

.richard.12-47-30: Are we expecting ptw?

.richard.12-47-59: His machine is not responding to ICMP ping messages

.gavinm.12-48-07: We are.

.richard.12-48-11: So I guess he's not on-line.

.sheep.12-48-40: ACTION finishes Java Log Lady goes for coffee ++ (back before 
meeting)

.richard.12-48-48: Wow.

.richard.12-48-52: Can I have a look?

.sheep.12-49-28: Not yet looked at the mac file open fix but have some idears 
on what to do

.richard.12-49-49: OK.  Don't worry until tomorrow.

.richard.12-49-56: (I have other fish to fry today.)

.richard.12-52-36: Good morning.

.ptw.12-52-45: morning

.drj.12-53-57: hello

.gavinm.12-59-30: Initiating dialup.

.ptw.13-00-39: ACTION switching to my headset

.ptw.13-01-00: ACTION is paying attention

.sheep.13-01-40: hello all

.drj.13-04-07: gavinm, I can't find one of my source docs

.drj.13-04-16: mail.gavinm.blah-blah

.sheep.13-04-51: ACTION checking

.drj.13-35-45: how often does logbot say that?

.gavinm.13-38-15: Every ten minutes,

.richard.13-54-36: Can you arrange for the LogBot not to say it again if 
nothing has happened since it said it the last time?

.richard.13-54-46: (c.f. syslogd)

.gavinm.13-55-04: Yes, but not now.  

.gavinm.13-55-43: It was a quick hack, and it's requirements now stretch the 
architecture.

.gavinm.13-55-53: e/it's/its/ -- The shame of it.

.drj.13-56-18: it could say it as people joined.

.gavinm.13-57-07: True.

.gavinm.14-00-49: *** Fifteen minutes to logging meeting.

.richard.14-04-32: This channel is logged.

.gavinm.14-06-34: Is it?

.gavinm.14-10-15: *** Five minutes

.richard.14-11-36: This channel will be used for logging.

.richard.14-11-57: Sheep has Log Lady.

.richard.14-12-09: Does anyone know why Robert Plant has a song called Big Log?

.richard.14-12-42: Let he who is without defects cast the first issue, etc.

.richard.14-12-48: ACTION wibbles

.gavinm.14-14-31: Initiating dialup.

.richard.14-15-34: Gus is ready.  Gorilla's ready.  Ziggy's ready.

.richard.14-16-54: I have 11 majors, 12 minors, 1 question, 1 comment.  Total 
25 issues.  I spent 40 minutes checking.

.gavinm.14-17-03: 21m  54 minutes

.richard.14-17-53: ACTION breathes heavily

.ptw.14-17-57: 46minutes, interrupted rest of time

.sheep.14-17-57: too confused to put in majors or minors  + all the time looking

.drj.14-18-30: 7Major 5Minor 55 minutes

.ptw.14-18-50: M 2, m 1, I 3, Q 4

.richard.14-19-24: Is that major issues anywhere?

.richard.14-19-33: INTRODUCTION, M, rule.universal.purpose: Purpose not clear.  
Is it an introduction to newcomers?  Are the procedures derived from it?  Is it 
authoritative?

.richard.14-19-34: general, M, Document is backwards.  Overview should be at 
the beginning.

.richard.14-19-40: .def.ver, M, Disagree -- it's a specification for a 
deliverable and a set of releases.

.richard.14-19-40.1: .def.prod, M, Disagree -- it's an entity of some other 
sort.  A deliverable is a particular thing which is delivered -- a release 
perhaps.

.richard.14-19-40.2: .def.req, M, rule.universal.cons: "Attribute" inconsistent 
with "attribute requirement".  It's a requirement.

.richard.14-19-40.3: .def.req, M, rule.universal.cons: "Should" -- not decided 
by the existence of a request

.richard.14-19-46: general, M, rule.universal.clear: Tenses make the time at 
which these various things take place very unclear.  It all sounds like past 
history.

.richard.14-19-52: .over.ver, M, rule.universal.clear: Stress that this is 
continuous and ongoing.

.richard.14-19-52.1: .over.fea, M, rule.universal.clear: How does he know how 
many?

.richard.14-19-52.2: .over.few, M, rule.universal.clear: Requirements are 
created by whom?

.richard.14-19-58: .status.rel.dev, M, No.  But changes can only be made to the 
product at this stage.  Development work can be done at any time.

.ptw.14-22-40: ACTION throws cat out of office

.sheep.14-28-13: ACTION thinks the purpose of logging per item - then 
everyone  looks and posisble extends comments

.gavinm.14-28-42: ACTION thinks that people should avoid commenting on 
comments.

.drj.14-29-56: general M it is not stated what the process is intended to do

.richard.14-30-03: ACTION would like IRC to prevent neck-ache

.drj.14-30-22: haeader M missing readership

.drj.14-30-35: defintions M should say DARWIN is and where to find tou about it

.drj.14-31-14: .def.rel.tree M 2nd clause unclear

.gavinm.14-31-38: ACTION has no neck-ache.

.drj.14-32-00: .role.inv M this is incomplete.   what about "the box is too 
weak to support stacking 10 high"

.drj.14-32-23: overview M unclear.  it is not an overview.

.richard.14-32-57: guide.?, IN, New general guidelines.  Overviews must stand 
more-or-less alone.

.drj.14-33-09: .over.ass + others M unclear when we are talking about DARWIN as 
opposed to the process

.sheep.14-33-58: ACTION wonders what a magour bug is in a document ?

.ptw.14-34-07: general M Where does documentation fit?  Is it separate, like QA 
or part of Development?  Requests may or may not change documentation, 
documentation changes may drive QA of new features

.gavinm.14-34-29: ACTION points out that a major bug is one where the cost to 
fix it increases with time.

.sheep.14-35-03: ACTION wonders how this relates to documents

.ptw.14-35-10: Physiology M On rework, assignment must revert to Implementing, 
no? So can release again? Does there really need to be a rework state?

.gavinm.14-35-23: Sheep, If a document causes someone to make a costly error, 
that's a major defect.

.drj.14-35-56: ACTION thinks gavinms previous two statements are inconsistent

.sheep.14-35-57: I'm confused about what a status is there seems to be too many 
status

.richard.14-37-12: general, NM, The process itself is not justified at all.  
Why do product evolution?

.sheep.14-37-28: pictures are good but seems hard correlate with the text.

.sheep.14-37-29: pictures are good but seems hard correlate with the text.

.richard.14-37-54: Uh-oh.

.ptw.14-38-31: .status.ass m perhaps .status.asgn?

.richard.14-38-32: It might do.  Can I put the phone down?

.ptw.14-38-49: ACTION gets his bid in early!

.richard.14-38-53: Let's see if it works.

.gavinm.14-38-59: INTRODUCTION

.richard.14-39-02: ACTION is off the phone

.richard.14-39-12: What about "general" issues?

.richard.14-39-25: (Gavin said to put them at the end)

.richard.14-39-26: OK

.gavinm.14-39-42: DEFINITIONS

.richard.14-39-45: Yes

.richard.14-39-51: .def.req, m, rule.universal.simple: It's a fix if it was 
intended, a feature if not.  Keep it simple.

.richard.14-39-51.1: .def.cha, m, rule.universal.clear: Not clear.

.richard.14-39-51.2: .def.ass, m, rule.universal.cons: Requests are not 
"achieved".

.richard.14-39-54: .def.ass, m, rule.universal.clear: Too many negatives.

.drj.14-40-01: .def.rel.tree "but" is a strange connector

.drj.14-40-02:  

.drj.14-40-02.1: .def.req.fea m aka an Request for Enhancement

.drj.14-40-02.2:  

.ptw.14-40-26: ACTION wonders why drj is inserting blank lines

.drj.14-40-34: .def.req.fix m clarity.  aka a "bug"

.drj.14-40-51: .def.ass m the number "four" is magic.

.richard.14-40-56: "bug" is a dangerous work, imo

.gavinm.14-41-08: .def.rel.tree m After "except the first", "in a product"

.drj.14-41-36: indeed, but a well known one.  whereas terms like "an evolution 
in actual specification" are not

.gavinm.14-41-37: .def.req.fea m Should clarify that requirements can be either 
attribute or functional

.gavinm.14-42-07: .def.req m A request is associated with a product; this isn't 
mentioned

.gavinm.14-42-27: .def.cha m Suggestion for "otherwise", read "apart from that"

.richard.14-42-36: Yes

.richard.14-42-40: I'm keeping up OK.

.richard.14-42-48: ACTION has finished definitions

.gavinm.14-42-52: TAGGING

.richard.14-43-07: .tag.*, m, rule.universal.cons: Inconsistent tag elements.

.richard.14-43-27: (Inconsistent with the elements used in DARWIN itself, that 
is.)

.drj.14-43-34: ACTION shakes head

.richard.14-43-37: general, Q, Why all the TLAs?

.richard.14-43-52: (Sorry, couldn't resist that one here.  It's relevant.)

.gavinm.14-44-18: ROLES

.richard.14-44-22: .role, m, Unjustified assertion that there must be at least 
three.

.richard.14-44-22.1: .role.qa, C, Suggest "Quality Assessor".

.drj.14-44-30: general nm tagging of this doc inconsistent

.drj.14-44-37: .role m last sentence needs justification

.drj.14-44-38: .role.req m "internal customers" are not mentioned in above list.

.sheep.14-44-52: why is there a diffrent person for  .role.pdm and 
.role.dev-man ?

.richard.14-45-30: (The dev man manages resources to make the releases happen.  
The PdM decides what releases will happen and what their specs are.)

.ptw.14-45-45: Nm is dev-man PrM?

.gavinm.14-45-53: OVERVIEW/Products

.richard.14-45-56: Joism.  Devman = Project Manager

.gavinm.14-46-20: OVERVIEW/Versions Releases Requirements

.drj.14-46-29: .over.req.note m "successfully inherited" unclear

.richard.14-46-33: .fig.ver, m, rule.universal.clear: Actual spec evolution 
arrow should be outside main diagram bounding box.

.richard.14-46-33.1: .fig.ver, m, Caption should be in text not drawing.

.richard.14-46-33.2: .fig.ver, m, rule.universal.clear: Arrowheads inconsistent 
or meaning of inconsistency is unclear.

.gavinm.14-46-48: .over.fea m This should not be the only record of customer 
requirements

.gavinm.14-47-34: .over m Need stuff about why we need MM Evolution.  Suggest: 
Everyone know's what he's doing; Things don't get droppped; Line of 
communication between Product manager and Development Manager.

.gavinm.14-48-08: .over m Need to mention what MM Evolution coveres, such as: 
Software, Documentation, Marketing stuff, Physical

.richard.14-48-29: GavinM: Good ones.

.gavinm.14-48-43: .fig.ver,.fig.hope m Diagrams should print correctly

.gavinm.14-48-52: ACTION takes a bow.

.richard.14-49-00: GavinM: There was quite a lot of discussion of that kind of 
thing early on.  See my wars with Bob Matthews.

.sheep.14-49-17: .fig.ver legend needs thin line

.richard.14-49-17: .fig.*, nm, Notes is broken.

.drj.14-49-20: ACTION nods

.sheep.14-49-23: explin ation

.gavinm.14-49-26: OVERVIEW/Requests changes assignmnets

.ptw.14-49-37: fixed in r4 ;-)

.richard.14-49-41: None from me.

.ptw.14-50-14: ACTION has lost his place (looking at out of line figs)

.gavinm.14-50-20: .over.req m Should mention development and release branches 
in first bullet.

.drj.14-50-36: ACTION realises he logged a defect too early

.gavinm.14-50-40: .over.change m First sentence doesn't mention assignments.

.richard.14-50-49: I have to say I didn't check STATUS very thoroughly.  It 
seems like a lot of redundant info, given proc.*.entry and proc.*.exit, and 
.fig.workflow.

.drj.14-51-06: likewise for me re status

.sheep.14-51-12: yep

.drj.14-51-12: is done on overview

.gavinm.14-51-15: STATUS/.status

.richard.14-51-18: You can make that an issue, I suppose.  general, nM.

.richard.14-51-39: See above.  I have no issues here.

.gavinm.14-51-43: STATUSES/Release

.drj.14-51-46: could use ! for not done, / for done, ? for has a question

.drj.14-52-10: ACTION is done with status

.gavinm.14-52-13: DRJ, that doesn't work if someone's halfway through typing.

.ptw.14-52-16: ACTION likes drj's suggestion

.gavinm.14-52-22: Request statuses

.richard.14-52-25: Most IRC clients have macro keys.

.sheep.14-52-28: confused about status.rel.waiting and states.req.waiting and 
diagram

.gavinm.14-52-38: .status.req.waiting m Can schedule at this stage

.ptw.14-52-47: ACTION realizes logging forward is a particular challenge for a 
backward reviewer

.richard.14-53-15: ptw: Just invert the sheet of paper which has all your 
issues neatly written on it.

.gavinm.14-53-19: .status.req.active m e/changed/changes/ two cases

.gavinm.14-53-32: Change Statuses

.drj.14-53-45: ah.  except it is quite hard to type a / on itsown in this 
client.

.drj.14-53-50: ACTION sighs

.drj.14-53-54: is done

.gavinm.14-53-57: .status.cha-dev m After "see .status.ass" "for order"

.sheep.14-54-03: status confison

.sheep.14-54-09: status confusion

.ptw.14-54-12: Betty Jo B: "the whole world is spinning!"  Danger:  "Just hold 
your hand on your script..."

.ptw.14-54-15: .status.ass m perhaps .status.asgn?

.gavinm.14-54-21: .status.cha-dev m Mention proc..change.assign

.richard.14-54-24: ACTION gets a phone call

.richard.14-54-30: It's CMT.

.ptw.14-54-52: ACTION waves "hi" to CMT

.sheep.14-54-55: ? Pause for Richard ? 

.richard.14-55-12: Just carry on.  Don't worry about me.

.gavinm.14-55-15: status.cha-dev m Mention change exception somewhere

.drj.14-55-27: !

.drj.14-55-27.1: ?

.ptw.14-55-30: .status.ass m perhaps .status.asgn?

.gavinm.14-55-30: Assignment statuses

.drj.14-55-33: what is a change exception?

.drj.14-55-47: ACTION sees

.ptw.14-56-01: I thought we were doing minor, are we doing Q also?

.drj.14-56-06: . /

.richard.14-56-10: I think anythhing non-major.

.gavinm.14-56-13: .status.ass m Before "order" "increasing"

.sheep.14-56-16: ./

.gavinm.14-56-40: .status.ass.release and elsewhere m After "working source" 
"of the release"

.richard.14-56-46: ACTION has already forgotten drj's code

.gavinm.14-56-52: .status.ass.reworking m Delete "be"

.ptw.14-57-03: ACTION doesn't remember . being in it

.gavinm.14-57-07: .status.ass.approving For "has" read "have"

.gavinm.14-57-26: PTW, We're doing non-major

.drj.14-57-31: it was intended to be mnemonic.  ! for more stuff to come (ie 
stop!), ? for questions, / (tick) for done

.drj.14-57-42: unfortunately I can't type a single / on its own

.ptw.14-57-45: ! -> Not done, ? -> Help, / -> "over to you, chairman"

.richard.14-57-54: B-b-but tick is '  (FORTH)

.drj.14-58-04: ./

.sheep.14-58-05: ./

.ptw.14-58-11: ./

.ptw.14-58-14: Physiology Q Assignments may not start until release starts?  
Theory or practice?

.gavinm.14-58-14: Workflow

.drj.14-58-17: .fig.workflow nM inputs to ovals unclear.  especially the one on 
bottom 

.drj.14-58-17.1: left.

.ptw.14-58-24: PhysiologyQ Purpose of Assignment releasing state?

.richard.14-58-28: .fig.workflow, nC, The workflow diagram is super.

.gavinm.14-58-34: .fig.workflow m Procedure boxes too light

.ptw.14-58-43: Physiology Q Purpose of "only if all" bullets on 
assignment->change automatic 

.sheep.14-58-59: after leaving re.active seems to go to create - waiting then 
direct to qa is this true ?

.gavinm.14-59-03: .fig.workflow m "(only withoin one column" is now redundant 
as there are no other lines with two arrows.

.drj.14-59-06: .fig.workflow nm lozenges should be "optically aligned" wrt to 
square boxes

.richard.14-59-09: GavinM: I told you not to use hairlines.

.ptw.14-59-12: ACTION wonders when to submit Q on source doc, and I

.sheep.14-59-49: comment the diagram is the best bit

.richard.15-00-07: I agree with Sheep.  It should be at the start, with the 
overview.

.gavinm.15-00-11: We'll do general next.

.ptw.15-00-23: Physiology nQ request.close is only if Accepted and Abandoned by 
QA?

.ptw.15-00-46: C diagram should be only bit!

.sheep.15-01-05: perhaps should swap assingment qith chage/qa to help read left 
to right 

.richard.15-01-12: See my previous issue about redundancy.

.gavinm.15-01-26: ACTION tried Sheep's suggestion; it made things much worse.

.drj.15-02-00: .fig.workflow nm

.drj.15-02-01: !

.sheep.15-02-04: ./

.ptw.15-02-13: ACTION wonders that RIT did not participate in this review, 
thinks his input important

.drj.15-02-26: complete is both a procedure in assignment and a status in 
assignment

.richard.15-02-30: RIT has already commented at the RFC stage

.ptw.15-02-36: ACTION notes one cannot type ! when in mid-thought

.drj.15-02-39: ./

.richard.15-02-42: Technically, review should be a consistency check which can 
be done by anyone.

.gavinm.15-02-42: PTW, You're right.  In fact, RIT was the only one who 
responded to my RFC.

.ptw.15-02-45: ./

.drj.15-02-51: as gavinm pointed out it doesn't work when one is typing.

.richard.15-03-14: general, Nm, Too many magic numbers.  They will become 
inconsistent.

.gavinm.15-03-21: ***Anything else

.ptw.15-03-26: ACTION wonders how to quote / so only / will show up

.richard.15-03-30: My other general issues are further up the log.

.richard.15-03-36:  /

.ptw.15-03-39: meeting.qa.1997-02-27 Q What is a patch release?  Can you really 
mini-QA something?  How do you verify the patch has not broken everything else?

.drj.15-03-42: ACTION used to know how to do that 

.ptw.15-04-07: doubling it should have...

.ptw.15-04-11: meeting.qa.1997-02-27 I Very important that full-QA stay "in 
practice", e.g., on milestone releases

.drj.15-04-17: /

.ptw.15-04-20: meeting.qa.1997-02-27 I Delivery on floppies - media validation 
is QA of manufacturing process, a separate "product"  QA releases to 
manufacturing

.drj.15-04-20: /say /

.ptw.15-04-41: re: /say /, Cripes!

.ptw.15-04-53: meeting.qa.1997-02-27 I Release must have a BOM (bill of 
materials, packing list), QA validates everything on that list

.richard.15-04-58: ACTION is interested by ptw's I issues

.drj.15-05-59: /

.sheep.15-06-15: ./

.ptw.15-06-25: I don't have a "say" command?

.ptw.15-06-29: ./

.drj.15-06-35: !

.drj.15-06-38: negatory gavin

.sheep.15-06-41: see you laterr

.drj.15-06-47: ACTION is getting lift with cmt and richard

.drj.15-06-50: ./

.ptw.15-06-59: Bye

.gavinm.15-06-59: Meetagain at 16:15 BST

.richard.15-09-11: What is this that roareth thus?

.richard.15-09-12: Can it be a Motor Bus?

.richard.15-09-12.1: Yes, the smell and hideous hum

.richard.15-09-12.2: Indicat Motorem Bum!

.richard.15-09-12.3: Implet wheresoe'er they ply

.richard.15-09-15: Terror me Motoris Bi:

.richard.15-09-15.1: Bo Motori clamitabo

.richard.15-09-15.2: Ne Motore caedar a Bo -

.richard.15-09-15.3: Dative be or Ablative

.richard.15-09-15.4: So thou only let us live:

.richard.15-09-15.5: Whither shall thy victims flee?

.richard.15-09-15.6: Spare us, spare us, Motor Be!

.richard.15-09-15.7: Thus I sang; and still anigh

.richard.15-09-15.8: Came in hordes Motores Bi,

.richard.15-09-18: Et complebat omne forum

.richard.15-09-18.1: Copia Motorum Borum.

.richard.15-09-18.2: How shall wretches live like us

.richard.15-09-21: Cincti Bis Motoribus?

.richard.15-09-21.1: Domine, defende nos

.richard.15-09-21.2: Contra hos Motores Bos!

.ptw.15-10-24: Vi cit tecem

.ptw.15-10-40: s/tecem/tecum/

.richard.15-10-47: My bluff is called!  What does that mean?

.gavinm.15-11-47: IRC Tip: Don't say "yes" or "no"; make a statement.

.richard.15-11-58: Yes

.richard.15-17-24: ACTION will be back in a few minutes

.gavinm.15-17-31: Hello.  Shall we try the brainstorm without the 'phone?

.ptw.15-17-47: ACTION i son the phone withy mother

.drj.15-17-54: we could try the brainstorm with the 'phone

.drj.15-18-25: so why does talking deactivate the spelling portion of the 
brain?  interesting isn't it?

.gavinm.15-18-38: While we're waiting for Richard to return, I'll comment that 
I found it refreshing not to have to type up everything and pay attention at 
the same time.

.gavinm.15-18-48: How did everyone else find it?

.drj.15-19-12: Aren't we going to wait till the beginning of the brainstorm?

.drj.15-19-18: ACTION needs a taste of paradise

.ptw.15-19-21: I will need to develop better procedure for self-logging (not 
sel Flogging)

.gavinm.15-19-53: When you're all ready.

.richard.15-19-54: ACTION returns

.gavinm.15-20-04: Sheep, are you there?

.richard.15-20-05: Sheep isn't here.

.ptw.15-20-35: "Vi cit tecum" I was hoping one of you could decode it.  Found 
in a .sig, my best guess (from my Latin dictionary, and intuition) is "The 
Force be with you".

.gavinm.15-20-48: Oh yes.  He sneaked off while I was busy, and some doggerel 
pushed it off my screen.

.drj.15-20-55: ./

.sheep.15-20-59: does anyone know what the red triangle on the phone means 

.ptw.15-21-02: ACTION 's phone is free

.richard.15-21-02: That was no doggerel.  That was my wife.

.gavinm.15-21-10: Sheep, messag ewiting

.drj.15-21-16: sheep, the reed triangle means you have voice mail

.gavinm.15-21-19: Sheep, Voice-mail unread

.gavinm.15-21-28: Is everyone ready?

.sheep.15-21-29: how do a read voice mail ? 

.gavinm.15-21-47: Sheep, I'll tell you later.

.richard.15-21-51: Oh no, not the voidemail system.  Select a free DN.  Then 
enter 01489783029784422.

.drj.15-21-54: sheep, pick up the handset then press the button marked 
"message".  you will need the pass number for the voice mai box (the box number 
is the same as your extension number)

.gavinm.15-22-21: ACTION clear throat.

.drj.15-22-25: ./

.sheep.15-22-28: ok done that

.gavinm.15-22-28: IS EVERYONE READY?

.richard.15-22-37: I don't know.

.gavinm.15-22-54: I thought we'd try process brainstorm without the 'phone.  Is 
that OK?

.ptw.15-22-57: ./

.drj.15-23-06: without the phone would be pokay

.drj.15-23-10: er, okay I mean

.sheep.15-23-20: the phone wants a password 

.ptw.15-23-24: ACTION thinks about it

.gavinm.15-23-30: I wondered whether "pokay was good or bad".

.ptw.15-23-36: ACTION decides to give it a try

.gavinm.15-23-50: The first major issue I select was:

.gavinm.15-23-57: .richard.14-19-34: general, M, Document is backwards.  
Overview should be at the beginning.

.richard.15-24-05: I think that typing in issues is a good thing.  It saves 
having to type them in during logging.

.ptw.15-24-16: No wonder it took me so long in backwards role

.sheep.15-24-20: ++

.richard.15-24-29: And drj's issue, that the overview isn't.

.richard.15-24-35: (Which I agree with.)

.gavinm.15-24-35: Discuss briefly how this happened, and possible solutions.  
Then we go on to process improvement to stop it happenning again.

.drj.15-24-41: typing in issues in incompatible with reading document out in 
the sun (for me)

.ptw.15-24-47: I was serious with my comment that the diagram should be the 
document

.ptw.15-25-02: If I understood the diagram, the rest of the document woudl be 
superfluous

.ptw.15-25-09: It is a good diagram

.gavinm.15-25-18: The diagram needs some explanation to stand on its own.  I 
could provide that.

.ptw.15-25-27: It took me most of my review time to understand it

.richard.15-25-27: I think the overview has far too much detail in it.  An 
overview should be a description that someone can read through quickly and 
understand what the document is about.  This one is obsessed with correctness.

.drj.15-25-42: it is a good diagream, and since we're sidetracked onto it, I 
should mention that the chief lack in the diagrma is that it doesn#t say who is 
responsible for what

.gavinm.15-25-49: Ah.  Perhaps it reflects its author.

.sheep.15-25-56: I agree with pwt about the diagram

.drj.15-26-00: perhaps that could be added in another diagram or as a layer in 
this one.  would be tricky to get right, but well worth it

.richard.15-26-14: I don't believe we could get away without some text.

.drj.15-26-15: I had a similar problem with the overview for the format doc I 
have been writting

.gavinm.15-26-18: I wanted to add responsibility, but couldn't think how.

.ptw.15-26-41: Yes, text is needed, but as support material

.richard.15-26-45: The diagram is a memoria technica for the document, but 
doesn't stand alone.

.sheep.15-26-51: May be a couple of diagrams could make things clear ?

.gavinm.15-26-51: The diagram wasn't enough to forestall some confusions about 
statuses.

.drj.15-27-03: a suggestion: the arrows represent actions that someone 
performs, they could be annotated somehow with the person that is responsible 
for performing them.

.richard.15-27-30: I really don't think the diagram is enough.  It documents 
the _procedure_ to some extent, and the flow of thigs, but there's no way it 
will discuss the justification for things.

.gavinm.15-27-36: The boxes represent actions.

.richard.15-27-50: It doesn't define terms, or responsibilities, either.

.gavinm.15-27-54: The process is under-justified.

.drj.15-27-54: in general I think the overview should allude to terms, describe 
them briefly, and explain where fuller documentation is availabnle for all 
terms that it has to introduce.

.richard.15-27-57: All these things are necessary, IMO.

.ptw.15-28-06: What is the purpose of process.darwin?  To justify, or to say 
how it is done?

.richard.15-28-19: ptw: A good question.  I asked it myself.

.gavinm.15-28-29: To provide a brief overview of what Darwin is and how we use 
it?

.richard.15-28-39: What does type.process say?

.drj.15-28-40: 10 pages is not brief

.ptw.15-28-55: I thought it was instructions on how to evolve product

.gavinm.15-29-02: Or to explain our solution to the problem of configuration 
management.

.ptw.15-29-09: not how or why we choose to do so

.richard.15-29-10: type.process.purpose says "Process documentation is supposed 
to describe and discuss all aspects of the development process, and justify 
things.

.richard.15-29-35: Instructions are proc.*

.richard.15-29-50: Process documentation is documentation of process, including 
reasons, imo.

.ptw.15-30-09: type.process.purpose nI Justification is misplaced in process 
documentation.

.richard.15-30-24: Are you confusing proc and process?

.ptw.15-30-27: Or am I confusing process with procedure

.drj.15-30-30: how do we solve the problem of getting sidetracked?  and is it 
worth it?  

.richard.15-30-33: I think so.

.richard.15-30-45: Are we sidetracked?  What was the question again>?

.drj.15-30-54: it was about the overview

.ptw.15-31-00: ACTION is interrupted

.gavinm.15-31-06: Perhaps a process document should be the top-level document 
for a process, and the various procedure that form part of the process should 
be (hypertextually) part of it. 

.richard.15-31-17: GavinM: That was my intention, I think.

.gavinm.15-31-27: DRJ, i think this is productive.

.drj.15-31-31: so do I

.richard.15-31-47: Overviews could be improved by saying what an overview is 
and how to write one, somewhere.  Rules for overviews, perhaps.  A guide to 
writing an overview.

.drj.15-32-09: one way of improving our doc in general would be to get a 
documentor to write it.

.richard.15-32-16: Perhaps we should wait for ptw to be ready again.

.drj.15-32-27: or alternatively to train the authors in technical writing.

.ptw.15-32-37: ACTION is back

.gavinm.15-32-40: I think many of these major issues could be solved by my 
having a clearer idea of what a process document is.  That's a process 
imporvement we're currently brainstorming.

.gavinm.15-33-00: DRJ, with IRC he can cath up a small delay.

.drj.15-33-18: drj->richard

.richard.15-33-35: OK.  So my idea was that process documents should explain 
the design of process, and procedure documents are the step by step 
implementations of that design.

.drj.15-33-37: richard had a rule earlier for overviews "they should work 
standalone"

.gavinm.15-33-44: I'd be delighted to be trained in technical writing.

.ptw.15-33-50: ACTION can't read very fast, though

.drj.15-33-53: so would I.  as it happens

.sheep.15-34-03: not me

.richard.15-34-10: Nobody mentioned technical writing in performance reviews.

.drj.15-34-18: improving my writing ability (though not particularly technical 
writing) is one reason why I am doing another degree.

.gavinm.15-34-19: "We promise not to train you."

.ptw.15-34-25: I did!

.ptw.15-34-36: my goal 1: 1/3 book

.gavinm.15-34-38: Can I mention it now?  I

.richard.15-34-40: ptw: Indirectly, I suppose you did.

.drj.15-34-43: oops.  secret requirement.  you can newver trust your customers 
to reveal their requirements.

.gavinm.15-34-49: I didn't think that wide-spectrum training was on offer.

.richard.15-34-58: Any more on this issue?

.richard.15-35-14: gavinM: requirements are independent of the available 
solutions

.ptw.15-35-35: Ircle has a bug -- it keeps selected text in focus and the 
conversation scrolls off the bottom

.richard.15-35-39: Gavin: Can you get LogBot to tell jokes?

.gavinm.15-35-41: Consider it mentioned.

.gavinm.15-35-50: Richard, yes.  But not now.

.gavinm.15-36-07: I can get it to tell fortunes.

.sheep.15-36-11: As a beginner I think it would be nice to do a more tutorial 
like introduction

.richard.15-36-14: I say I say I say -- I just got in from BND sector, and boy 
are my arms tired!

.gavinm.15-36-14: The next issue was:

.gavinm.15-36-22: .richard.14-19-58: .status.rel.dev, M, No.  But changes can 
only be made to the product at this stage.  Development work can be done at any 
time.

.drj.15-36-26: ptw, hmm.  I guess the alternative would be to scroll the 
selection as you were making it.  which would be a nightmare.  I guess it 
should really know when you are actively making a selection and when you are 
not.

.ptw.15-36-38: Is this Wembley?

.richard.15-37-02: Developers are free to develop at any time.  But change to 
the product must be controlled.

.sheep.15-37-11: Is what Wembley _ - I think we are having tomany conversations 
at once.

.richard.15-37-18: Whether or not the effort is timely is a matter for 
development management, not for DARWIN or product management.

.richard.15-37-29: Welcome to IRC, sheep.

.ptw.15-37-39: No, Mac UI guidelines allow your selection to not be visible.  
You can have an active selection and also scroll to other parts of the document.

.richard.15-37-43: You should try it with 50 people on a channel.

.gavinm.15-37-46: Darwin (and presumably EP) has the idea that the start of 
work (not check-in) on an assignment is recorded, and happens when the relase 
is in development.

.gavinm.15-37-57: I don't believe this is enforced.

.ptw.15-38-00: If developers develop at any time, change is not controlled!

.sheep.15-38-15: seems like the structure of the meeting is breaking up

.richard.15-38-22: ptw: Change to the product can be controlled.  Developers 
develop on branches.

.ptw.15-38-31: ACTION wonders what popping sound is behind eyeballs

.drj.15-38-35: but if they work towards or on a particular change it shouldn't 
matter that the change isn't entirely up to date in darwin

.drj.15-38-52: is you rhead exploding perhaps ptw?

.ptw.15-38-56: ACTION realizes it is his brain trying to keep up

.richard.15-38-59: I disagree with EP's attempt to integrate project and change 
management.

.richard.15-39-27: nM, goals of DARWIN not stated!

.ptw.15-39-34: Even if you develop in branches, developers will want their 
development in the product

.gavinm.15-39-45: It's important to distinguish changes to the "working source" 
(i.e. the relase branch or sometimes trunk) from other changes.

.ptw.15-39-54: Which is why developers must be in the marketing/requirements 
loop

.richard.15-40-00: Developers can want what they like, but change will be 
controlled by the process.

.gavinm.15-40-06: The latter changes are represented by "Implementing" as an 
Assignment status.

.ptw.15-40-15: Are we not men?

.richard.15-40-23: (We are DEVO)

.ptw.15-40-40: Exactly

.gavinm.15-40-59: I think we should take this discussion to e-mail.  Objections?

.richard.15-41-06: No, but seriously folks, what we're talking about here is 
whether a developer can start hacking away before a particular field is set to 
a particular value in the database.

.richard.15-41-06.1: I object.

.ptw.15-41-15: !

.ptw.15-41-32: R: yes.

.gavinm.15-41-42: ACTION goes to research where this arrow comes from.

.ptw.15-41-48: And whether the developer can drive change/product by doing so

.richard.15-41-51: My position is that it is at the discretion of the developer 
when he works on the problem.  The main thing is to keep the product at known 
quality by controlling change.

.gavinm.15-42-19: From the release form doc: Development: Development work is 
under way. Associated changes can now be moved on from Unassigned or Waiting.

.richard.15-42-31: Development must drive change by feedback to marketing and 
product management about what is desirable and feasible.  In that way they 
control what changes get scheduled int he first place, to some extent.

.ptw.15-42-44: Okay

.richard.15-43-03: That feedback is at a higher level, not at the level of 
deltas to the product itself.

.richard.15-43-15: (Maybe all this needs to be in the document, Gavin.)_

.gavinm.15-43-22: From "The release cycle": - The product manager sets the 
release date and working source fields before development work can start on the 
release, and when work begins the release status field will be set to 
Development.

.ptw.15-43-28: But you are suggesting a looser coupling of development work and 
the darwin proc.assignment.*

.gavinm.15-43-47: ACTION tries to catch up.

.richard.15-43-51: Yes, I am suggesting that.

.ptw.15-44-03: I personally believe the developer should not have to set 
proc.ass.*, rather, PrM should handle that

.richard.15-44-17: ptw: Disagree.

.ptw.15-44-27: It is a status report, not a gating function

.richard.15-44-36: All the managers need to know who is changing what.  Me 
included.  I look at DARWIN to dinf out what's going on.

.richard.15-44-58: When people are split across sites all round the world it is 
very important to be able to see status directly.

.richard.15-45-10: The chosen communication medium for changes is the change 
record.

.richard.15-45-22: Therefore those who make the changes must communicate the 
change and edit the record.

.gavinm.15-45-28: Let's look at this another way:

.richard.15-45-32: Otherwise we're back to square one.

.gavinm.15-45-43: How early should the release be set to Development?

.ptw.15-45-54: Perhaps it is the implementation of the medium that bothers me

.gavinm.15-46-24: The implementation is only partly under our control.

.richard.15-46-46: I agree that Notes/DARWIN is not an idea implementation of 
the evolution process.  However, NickB, who was initially skeptical, is now 
dashing off work under this system with great facility.  Ask him about it.  
(He's gone home.)

.gavinm.15-47-03: Lucky for you, eh?

.richard.15-47-07: The overhead is in the tens of minutes.

.gavinm.15-47-24: >  How early should the release be set to Development?

.ptw.15-47-33: In previous lives status was PULL, you want PUSH (from my POV)

.richard.15-47-46: ptw: I guess that's true.

.gavinm.15-47-52: What does it mean for the PdM to delay this step?

.richard.15-47-53: Otherwise people spend all their time pulling.

.richard.15-48-12: That's one of the problems that DARWIN sets out to solve.

.ptw.15-48-15: But you don't want your devo'

.richard.15-48-18: (I have ten minutes, as does DRJ)

.gavinm.15-48-21: Richard's been pulling so much he's starting to unravel.

.ptw.15-48-24: s to spend all their time pushing

.richard.15-48-42: I think you're overestimating the overhead of the procedure.

.drj.15-49-15: I don't think the overs are that great.  Once you've designed 
the change to the source, implemented it, tested it, got it reviewed, setting a 
field in a change document is trivial

.ptw.15-49-19: I'm basing it on my one experience where the overhead was ~ 
30-40%

.richard.15-49-25: drj: Right.

.gavinm.15-49-37: > How early should the release be set to Development? What 
does it mean for the PdM to delay this step?

.ptw.15-49-44: Irlce sucks.  No standard editing in input window!

.richard.15-49-47: ptw: Once is not enough, really.  It is a bit slow at first.

.sheep.15-49-53: Perhaps the question might be should Hq sell Evolution and 
Hope 

.ptw.15-50-04: This was my 4 glossary entries.

.richard.15-50-08: Gavin: Stop trying to change the subject.

.ptw.15-50-11: 4 times

.drj.15-50-12: that would take till eternity

.drj.15-50-32: hmm.  for glossary entries I can see it being much less clear.

.gavinm.15-50-49: Richard: I thought that was my job.

.drj.15-51-05: (perhaps because glossary entries don't get designed, tested, 
and reviewed.  and there's no compiler).

.ptw.15-51-08: Don't hqn think they are going to sell this some day?

.richard.15-51-09: Gavin: Well, you're not doing very well.

.richard.15-51-21: ptw: Something like it, I'm sure.

.drj.15-51-30: ptw, it was a kind of pun.  eternity/eternal

.drj.15-51-36: oops.  I explained.

.richard.15-51-41: Tsk.

.ptw.15-51-42: ACTION groans

.richard.15-51-55: OK, next topic?

.richard.15-52-01: What I did on my holidays.

.ptw.15-52-13: ACTION wonders why gavin doesn't OP some blowhards off the 
channel if he is losing control...

.gavinm.15-52-26: Has anyone any process improvement suggestions on this issue?

.ptw.15-52-45: on Free for all?

.richard.15-52-45: Yes.  All this discussion was not adequately explained in 
process.darwin.

.richard.15-52-51: Otherwise we wouldn't need to discuss it.

.richard.15-52-57: Therefore the document is deficient.

.gavinm.15-53-05: How can we prevent unresolved issues like this from sneaking 
into process?

.ptw.15-53-34: Try again?

.richard.15-53-43: I don't know.

.ptw.15-53-48: ./

.gavinm.15-53-52: Ok.  Let's move on.

.richard.15-54-05: 6 mins

.gavinm.15-54-20: .sheep.14-35-57: I'm confused about what a status is there 
seems to be too many status

.gavinm.15-54-34: How did this happen?  How can we prevent it?

.richard.15-54-40: There was too much detail in the document about all this.

.gavinm.15-54-54: Too much detail?

.richard.15-55-00: I think this is related to my issue abot redundancy.  Let 
the diagram exmplain the statuses.

.drj.15-55-00: much of which is superseded by the diagram

.richard.15-55-06: Massive amounts of detail.

.drj.15-55-25: by how much can we compress the log by removing logbot's 
utterances?

.gavinm.15-55-46: Ok.  I need to elimintae redeundancy more when saying the 
same thing twice in words and pictures.

.richard.15-55-51: I like it.  A sort of non-sequiteur.

.ptw.15-56-06: I have an anecdote about documentation

.gavinm.15-56-12: Focus, guys.

.richard.15-56-18: GavinM: I think the "level" of the document needs to be 
raised.  More discussion, less detail.

.richard.15-56-30: cmt says: "4 minutes"

.drj.15-56-46: yes.  process documents should be an overview in themselves 
probably.

.gavinm.15-56-50: I think we've covered my fourth issue, so I'll turn to review 
process itself. 

.gavinm.15-57-09: Has anyone any issues about review process to raise?

.richard.15-57-18: IRC: Good for brainstorms, bad for ordered meetings (at the 
moment)

.ptw.15-57-22: Yes,  I can't type / by itself

.ptw.15-57-33: IRC is not registered

.drj.15-57-37: perhaps we need a different set of symbols / conventions then

.richard.15-57-40: We need some conventions for dealing with logging meetings 
by IRC.

.gavinm.15-57-40: I liked the way logging went.  I managed to concentrate on 
other people's issue a lot more.

.ptw.15-57-46: Is Ircle the best client?

.ptw.15-58-08: I would rather R learn how to paste individual items

.ptw.15-58-22: I think the voice-over is important

.drj.15-58-26: I felt there was lots of dead space when logging.  it improved 
when we had the convention for saying when we were ready.  even though th4e 
convention turned out to be slightly naff

.richard.15-58-29: ptw: I was being a bit provocative, I will admit.

.gavinm.15-58-47: Were you able to concentrate on looking at others' issues, 
and find new issues from them?

.richard.15-59-01: My point was that we needed some control.  Gilb says "Log as 
fast as possible."  I don't think he thought of using IRC and paste.

.ptw.15-59-05: What does the [.|..] in my input line display mean?

.drj.15-59-16: one of the problems with the big cut and paste is that when 
subsequently commenting on them, I had to find the issue in my window, read it, 
and then listen to the commentary

.ptw.15-59-24: No, I could only listen and look, not read, listen, look

.richard.15-59-27: Your flags?  Your're 'I'.

.richard.15-59-33: More than that I cannot say.

.gavinm.15-59-33: Ok.  No spamming, then.

.ptw.15-59-36: drj: YEs

.ptw.15-59-50: Whatever I means

.drj.15-59-57: so instead of suggesting some throttle, you just pointed out in 
an unhelpful way that we needed some sort of control.

.richard.16-00-03: This discussion, otoh, is working well, I think.  High rate 
and little lossage.

.gavinm.16-00-03: I find it difficult to control an IRC meeting.

.drj.16-00-09: indeed.

.drj.16-00-15: I think it works very well for discussion.

.richard.16-00-19: Gavin: I think we're unruly on IRC.

.ptw.16-00-30: Can't you throttle people if you are OP?

.gavinm.16-00-36: ACTION hits Richard with a foam rubber armadillo.

.richard.16-00-40: You can kick them off the channel.

.richard.16-00-49: Gavin: Things would be improved by conventions.

.ptw.16-00-53: IS that the only option?

.gavinm.16-00-53: That's a little heavy-weight.

.richard.16-00-56: cmt: "zero minutes"

.richard.16-00-59: I have to go.

.ptw.16-01-06: 'later

.gavinm.16-01-14: I'll try to write up an RFC for IRC conventions.  I don't 
know when, but.

.sheep.16-01-15:  I have just made a viable version of Loglady anyone want to 
try it out ? 

.drj.16-01-17: ACTION is going too

.richard.16-01-20: I suggest working out a convention for logging meetings.  
That's all.  Bye.

.gavinm.16-01-29: OK.  Meeting over.  

.gavinm.16-01-32: Thanks everyone.

.richard.16-01-35: sheep: Love to.  Tomorrow morning.  See you.

.drj.16-01-35: sheep, yes please.  but not today.  are you here tomorrow?

.sheep.16-01-57: Yes I'll move the project and stuff to my public folder

.ptw.16-02-23: ACTION slumps back in his chair, rubs his eyballs

.gavinm.16-02-28: Does anyone have any other questions I can answer?

.gavinm.16-02-45: ACTION thinks that today's review has been far less 
exhausting than usual.

.ptw.16-02-58: ACTION wants to know how to escape /

.gavinm.16-03-14: ACTION suggests the window.

.ptw.16-03-20: ACTION thinks exhaustion has been meted out to participants

.gavinm.16-03-47: ACTION prefers it that way.

.ptw.16-03-51: ACTION laughs at the idea of /'s going out his window

.ptw.16-04-33: ACTION is going to take a (well deserved, in his opinion) break


.gavinm.16-04-44: ACTION doesn't feel like like a damp dishrag, unusually.

.gavinm.16-05-06: Just me here now.

.gavinm.16-05-21: And LogBot, but he's a boring conversationalist.

.gavinm.17-04-25: Ah.  Lunchtime.

.gavinm.20-04-08: Hello?

.logbot.20-09-02: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   I put aside my 
copy of "BOWLING WORLD" and think about GUN CONTROL legislation..

.gavinm.20-09-08: Hello.

.logbot.20-25-44: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   A can of 
ASPARAGUS, 73 pigeons, some LIVE ammo, and a FROZEN DAQUIRI!!

.logbot.20-36-28: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   I put aside my 
copy of "BOWLING WORLD" and think about GUN CONTROL legislation..

.logbot.20-42-08: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Am I 
SHOPLIFTING?

.logbot.20-54-30: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   This MUST be a 
good party -- My RIB CAGE is being painfully pressed up against someone's 
MARTINI!!

.logbot.21-30-37: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Where does it 
go when you flush?

.logbot.21-31-09: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Yow! I'm 
imagining a surfer van filled with soy sauce!

.logbot.21-36-21: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   

.logbot.21-43-18: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Did you move a 
lot of KOREAN STEAK KNIVES this trip, Dingy?

.logbot.21-43-32: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Mary Tyler 
Moore's SEVENTH HUSBAND is wearing my DACRON TANK TOP in a cheap hotel in 
HONOLULU!

.logbot.21-45-27: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   

.logbot.21-48-05: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   

.logbot.21-49-36: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   

.logbot.21-52-14: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   We are now 
enjoying total mutual interaction in an imaginary hot tub ...

.logbot.21-53-31: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   RHAPSODY in 
Glue!

.logbot.21-57-36: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   

.logbot.21-58-03: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   My polyvinyl 
cowboy wallet was made in Hong Kong by Montgomery Clift!

.logbot.21-59-42: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Of course, you 
UNDERSTAND about the PLAIDS in the SPIN CYCLE --

.logbot.22-01-25: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   I need to 
discuss BUY-BACK PROVISIONS with at least six studio SLEAZEBALLS!!

.logbot.22-01-26: JOIN

.logbot.22-03-06: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   I want to so 
HAPPY, the VEINS in my neck STAND OUT!!

.logbot.22-03-06.1: JOIN

.topic.22-03-06: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-04-11: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   I'm receiving a 
coded message from EUBIE BLAKE!!

.logbot.22-04-11.1: JOIN

.topic.22-04-11: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-05-39: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04   Disco oil 
bussing will create a throbbing naugahide pipeline running straight to the 
tropics from the rug producing regions and devalue the dollar!

.logbot.22-05-39.1: JOIN

.topic.22-05-39: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-08-53: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  What I want 
to find out is -- do parrots know much about Astro-Turf?

.logbot.22-08-53.1: JOIN

.topic.22-08-53: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-18-00: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  I have 
accepted Provolone into my life!

.logbot.22-18-00.1: JOIN

.topic.22-18-00: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-21-02: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  An air of 
FRENCH FRIES permeates my nostrils!!

.logbot.22-21-02.1: JOIN
.topic.22-21-02: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-21-25: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  Everybody is 
going somewhere!! It's probably a garage sale or a disaster Movie!!

.logbot.22-21-25.1: JOIN

.topic.22-21-25: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-27-07: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  Yow! Did 
something bad happen or am I in a drive-in movie??

.logbot.22-27-07.1: JOIN

.topic.22-27-07: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-29-35: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  FEELINGS are 
cascading over me!!!

.logbot.22-29-35.1: JOIN

.topic.22-29-35: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-29-59: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  Awright, 
which one of you hid my PENIS ENVY?

.logbot.22-29-59.1: JOIN

.topic.22-29-59: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-41-17: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.logbot.22-41-17.1: JOIN

.topic.22-41-17: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-43-38: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.logbot.22-43-38.1: JOIN

.topic.22-43-38: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-44-11: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.logbot.22-44-11.1: JOIN

.topic.22-44-11: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.22-45-20: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.logbot.22-45-20.1: JOIN

.topic.22-45-20: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-01-14: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.logbot.23-01-14.1: JOIN

.topic.23-01-14: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-02-28: JOIN

.logbot.23-02-47: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.topic.23-02-47: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.gavinm!~gavinm@terpsichore.long.harlequin.co.uk.23-02-48: Spam!

.logbot.23-03-53: JOIN

.logbot.23-04-07: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.topic.23-04-07: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-05-22: JOIN

.logbot.23-05-22.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  

.topic.23-05-22: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-05-57: JOIN

.logbot.23-05-57.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-05-57: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-07-17: JOIN

.logbot.23-07-17.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-07-17: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-07-58: JOIN

.logbot.23-07-58.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-07-58: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-14-35: JOIN

.logbot.23-14-35.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-14-35: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-29-00: JOIN

.logbot.23-29-00.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-29-00: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-29-56: JOIN

.logbot.23-29-56.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-29-56: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-30-26: JOIN

.logbot.23-30-26.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-30-26: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-33-06: JOIN

.logbot.23-33-06.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-33-06: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-33-39: JOIN

.logbot.23-33-39.1: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.topic.23-33-39: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.gavinm!~gavinm@terpsichore.long.harlequin.co.uk.23-34-28: Hello.

.gavinm.23-34-41: JOIN

.logbot.23-34-41: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  8-(

.gavinm!~gavinm@terpsichore.long.harlequin.co.uk.23-34-51: Hello eveybody.

.logbot.23-35-12: JOIN

.logbot.23-35-36: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.topic.23-35-36: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-36-12: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.logbot.23-43-36: JOIN

.logbot.23-43-40: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  ... I want to 
perform cranial activities with Tuesday Weld!!

.topic.23-43-40: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-48-44: JOIN

.logbot.23-48-48: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.topic.23-48-48: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-57-11: JOIN

.logbot.23-57-50: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.topic.23-57-50: TOPIC: MM Discussion

.logbot.23-58-23: JOIN

.logbot.23-58-48: This channel is logged to irc.mm.1997-06-04 --  <insert joke 
here>

.topic.23-58-48: TOPIC: MM Discussion


