             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-02-02
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-02-02

Start 1999-02-02, 11:35 GMT

Telecon: Dave Berry <daveb>, David Jones <drj>, Tony Mann <tony>, Pekka
Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>.


NEWS

tony: Brisling release now basically complete - so we can start looking 
further ahead.

tony: Dylaners have started to look at Jackdaw. There's a problem with the 
interface to the message queue, but I have discussed a workaround with Nosa.

tony: Jonathan has raised the issue of a possible MM-related performance 
problem with mutable in-line call-caches. This might be related to the cost 
of the write barrier.

tony: Chris Gathercole from ASG is just starting to get some real lifetime 
data from Dylan.

tony: The real-time Java list has now been set up (thanks Dave). It seems 
remarkably quiet. Probably this is because communication is clustered around 
meeting dates.

tony: I've spent some time with AndyS working on a plan for porting Dylan to 
Solaris. What's the official position of this work?

daveb: Rand bank want this - so it's an important port. Don't expect to need to 
pull in resources from outside of Dylan group, though.

daveb: Sent some mail to JH requesting clarification about Raytheon's VXWorks 
requirements. No reply yet.


BRISLING

tony: Story at the moment: a couple of platform-specific problems were
found with brisling.1. Mac make file was wrong -- that led to brisling.2.
Problem with taking lots of address space on Irix 5 ...

pekka: EP are happy to workaround this in the core skin, for the time
being. I spoke to Eric and he seemed quite happy.


QA

rit: Sent out QA report yesterday. Generally very favourable. Brisling.2 
fixes all known problems. The spare committed facility gives good speedups.

rit: I'm now anxious about 1 test where the client arena seemed slower with 
brisling. New tests show some configurations are definitely about 3% slower.

tony: Are these realistic configurations?

rit: Yes - they correspond to Eric's earlier test configuration - e.g. 300DPI.

pekka: That's realistic - but not typical for SW customers.

rit: Suggest doing some profiles to look at the causes of the slowdown. 
Don't know the reason at the moment. We should mention this to EP soon as 
they are pressed for time for the SW release.

tony: might be better to wait for the profiling results if these are imminent.

pekka: Suggest waiting no more than 1 day.

all: agreed.

pekka: I have some Quality comments: we still have various approvals open,
in brisling releases, earlier SW releases, and release.mps.dylan.jackdaw,
which is technically a parent of brisling. Some of these are to do with
ScriptWork GC, so we don't need to worry about them too much right now, but
the others are more serious.

tony: The problem presumably is that the approval work isn't being done,
not that the database isn't kept up-to-date?

pekka: Sometimes, but not always.

rit: Is this a consequence of the policy of releasing things that haven't
been approved? (I guess I could say the same for changes that haven't been
QAed!)

pekka: In a way, yes, but we need some flexibility there.

tony: It seems getting these approvals done should be our top priority now.

drj: Yes.


FUTURE RELEASES

tony: Question that popped up yesterday: do we still need to support SunOS
platform? ScriptWorks no longer need us to. Can we drop it?

daveb: The only people I know who use it are lisp. I'd suggest drop it; you
can always add it again if it becomes a requirement later on.

pekka: We can do what we do for Mac 68K -- it's still there, but we don't
build it and we don't worry about bug reports.

tony: Let's drop it then.

tony: Our next priority release is Java. In the plan, I've assumed we'll be
able to start using the JVM around Febrary 12th.


PLAN

[rit's Mac crashed at this point. remaining notes taken by drj]

pekka: Are there now more columns in plan?

tony: No. Individual plans are simpler than they were.  group plan has all 
its original columns..

pekka: I like my individual plan.

daveb: what is milestone chub?

tony: next EP release (after brisling).  chub is effectively a rename,
replacing "better brisling".  But it includes the new major task of
"allocation cache".

tony: nightmare with MS Project.  By luck and faffing now works again
and it should be possible to turn around new plans quite quickly.

daveb: is it worth having an explicit framework (MPS) release?

tony: that's possible.  But framework stuff can be incorporated into
real client releases.  eg lots of framework changes are in "real java"
milestone.

daveb: just making sure that all the framework work gets done in the
rush for EP and java.

tony: much framework work has been incorporated into chub and java
releases.  e.g. locus manager is in chub.

pekka: there are good technical reasons for locus manager in chub.

tony: yes, customers will want locus manager.  Not necessary to invent
a release for MPS.

pekka: raises question of why internal release which were in the plan
all appear so late.  Two of these are still visible in the group plan.
They are all in the summer.

tony: brisling delayed where we thought we were in the plan.  At the moment
plan doesn't reflect release efforts for future releases.  Bear in mind
that there is some cost for rearranging java work.  If anyone has any
good ideas then I am receptive.

drj: what do you mean by release efforts for future releases?

tony: building, qa, bug fixing, lots of work with a release.

rit: can you program MS project to have a constant factor of slop.

tony: yes.  Also can systematically overestimate tasks when they are
created.

rit: maybe it would be a sensible procedure to see whether things
are taking longer than was estimated and nudge the slop factor until
plan accords with reality.

tony: yes plan must be tracked.  Plan has a baseline which is designed
for exactly that sort of thing.  But this has been adjusted, because
plan has changed.  Still have old plans so it would be possible to
track agsinst old plans.

rit: in global terms it took siginificantly longer to do brisling.  Maybe
that doesn't break down as certain tasks taking longer than expected.
Maybe there were more tasks.

daveb: maybe we need a specific task for the release of each
milestone.

pekka: certainly from the timing point of view QA should be on the plan.

tony: meeting last week decided that rit's QA work would be on the
plan.  It's not on the plan and we should put it on.  By the same token
even the immediate QA isn't on there.


AOB

drj: meeting with epcore soon?

pekka: yes soon.  maybe thursday.

drj: what about macos X?  We should ask whether they're likely to want
it.  'cause that's a new platform.  And probably involves buying a
machine.

rit: office moves?

daveb: haven't heard anything.


finish 1212.


