                   SURVEY OF IRC CLIENTS AND SERVERS
                              resource.irc
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1998-02-18

.intro: IRC is used in the MM group.  We don't have standard clients, and we 
recognize that software support is really Systems' responsibility, but here is 
a survey of clients used.  Availability is indicated where possible.


SERVERS

.server.use: We use our servers for general chat, and meetings.  The "call-up" 
channel is #mm.  [ Need to say more here.  gavinm 1998-02-18]

.server.trillian: We run a server on trillian.cam.harlequin.co.uk 
(192.88.238.37) port 6667.

.server.trillian.start: To restart the server, execute (preferably as gavinm) 
[should be as mm]:
  /u/ldisk/gavinm/lib/irc/ircd


TOOLS


LogBot

.tool.logbot: We have a "bot" that logs conversations.

.tool.logbot.start: To start logbot, execute (preferably as gavinm) [should be 
as mm]:
  nohup /u/ldisk/gavinm/perl/logbot.pl &

.tool.logbot.archive: The archive is copied to MM Information as irc.* from 
time to time.  Initially it is available in /u/ldisk/gavinm/irc-logs/.

.tool.logbot.start.not-gavinm: If you're not gavinm, you can't start logbot 
because you won't have access.  There's a copy in 
trillian:/u/ldisk/richardk/perl you can use, with:
  nohup /u/ldisk/richardk/perl/logbot.pl &
This puts logs in:
  /u/ldisk/richardk/irc-logs

PC CLIENTS

.pc.visualirc: VisualIRC is very slow and clunky, with terrifying options 
dialogs, but is usuable.  GavinM 1998-02-18


MAC CLIENTS

.mac.macirc: MacIRC is good, but the beta has a bug in resolving server names.  
Use IP addresses and you'll be fine.  Available from McHine (my portable) via 
AppleShare in Public.  GavinM 1998-02-18  Version 0.96 fixes the DNS problem 
and is available from McHine, and also from <URL:http://www.macirc.com/>.  
gavinm 1998-02-25

.mac.ircle: Ircle (3.0b10) is also good. It is shareware, downloadable for 
evaluation from <URL: http://www.xs4all.nl/~ircle/>. ircle is scriptable (with 
AppleScript), supports various ctcp commands, and has a range of amusing sound 
effects (which you can turn off). After a very brief comparison, I preferred it 
to MacIRC. rit 1998-03-10


UNIX CLIENTS

.unix.irc: A basic UNIX client is available on trillian in /u/gavinm/lib/irc, 
compiled for Solaris.  GavinM 1998-02-18
.unix.ircii: A slightly better UNIX client is ircII.  It has a plain tty 
interface so is still a bit clunky, still, does the basic stuff.  A 
SPARC/Solaris2.x executable is on trillian in /u/drj/opt/SunOS5/ircii/bin/irc.  
drj 1998-02-19

