                      GROUP MEETING ON 1997-02-07
                       meeting.general.1997-02-07
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-02-07

INTRODUCTION

.who: Richard Brooksby <Richard>, Richard Tucker <RIT>, David Jones <DRJ>, Nick 
Barnes <NickB>, Tucker Withington <PTW>, Gavin Matthews <GavinM>.


REPORTS

David Jones <DRJ>

.drj: Doing three things:
  - Finalization work;
  - PSP ideas;
  - Nick's four day release cycle.

Four day release cycle went horribly wrong because the testing failed badly.  
The design wasn't adequate.

PTW: No design review in 4DRC.

DRJ: PSP stuff is easy and will probably be instructive.  Logging what I get up 
to and how long it takes.

Richard: Thin PSP book is good for skim through, fat one for full analysis.

DRJ: Coming to end of finalization stuff.  Can review design and/or 
implementation next Wednesday.

Richard: We haven't abandoned 4DRC, but we need to try again.

What do you think of the process stuff?

DRJ: Process stuff is good.  This week has been one of my more productive weeks 
at Harlequin.  Sorting out at the beginning of week what I'm going to do is 
worthwhile.  This must be common place in other industries.  


Nick Barnes <NickB>

.nickb: Doing EP stuff, fixing Mac problem, now working on Unix.  Feedback from 
EP is quite positive.  Spoke to Dave T. Berry.  They seem to believe we can 
close this performance problem.  They want it in the trunk as sooon as possible 
to be stress-tested while I'm dinking with the performance.

Richard: I would be a bit more conservative.  When you have a plan to improve 
the performance then we can make statements about confidence.  There might be 
surprizes for us.

NickB: Also doing ML stuff.  Sun delivered new kernel for UltraSPARC.  Needed 
to do change so it will work on SPARC and UltraSPARC.  There was talk of ML 1.1 
with this bug fix.

PTW: It's neat the EP is performing so well.

GavinM: What slowdown in the MM does the 10% overall slowdown represent?

NickB: Don't know.  We also don't know how much is MM slowdown and how much is 
fragmentation problems.

EP are currently unhappy with trunk instability.  The comes from GUI work 
happening at the same time.

PTW: Are you using a frozen baseline?

NickB: No; I'm measuring against a moving target.  It's worse than before, but 
I'm getting a lot of assistance from EP.

Richard: Have you talked to Simon Green, our new liaison?

NickB: Not yet, I will.  Andy is having problem building SW on his Mac.  
Apparently Luke says that no-one is his group is having problems.

Richard: We'll need a SPARC stack scanner eventually.  It might be a good idea 
to write things down before you forget them.

NickB: Are we proposing to use memory protection?

Richard: Not really.  It's not high on our list.

It's good that this bug has finally been fixed.


Gavin Matthews <GavinM>

.gavinm: Relegate web work to an hour per day.  Process in Darwin despite 
reservation, need to analyse Darwin soon.  Event handling needs better planning.


Tucker Withington <PTW>

.ptw: Working on book, getting diverted into research for outline, trying to 
see GC from the other side.  Getting lots of material.

Having trouble dealing with all my mail.  Liked Richard's scheme.

Richard: It would be good to see early ideas on outline.  We have little idea.  
It might be good to circulate things, veen half-baked.  Has the discussion of 
goals and requirements been helpful?

PTW: I haven't been able to connect it with the outline.  It's top-down, as 
opposed to bottom-up.  There's a gap which will get bridged eventually.

Richard: Looking at MM section of requirements, how does it help with MM?  Say 
you find an important topic in a C++ book, that's a requirement.

PTW: These will show up in the outline.  I'm using lots of index cards with 
notes on them.

Also researching finalization stuff, seeing what Apple did.

Richard: Good that that's been resolved.  In the longer time, the book is 
supposed to occupy half you time.  That doesn't matter so much for a short 
while, but you need to be looking at the tool.

PTW: I need to look at the notes I made while you were here and get a detailed 
design document for each part.

Richard: Also need to look at DUIM, and also David and Gavin need to get 
together with Tucker about events and so on.  Also a trip needs to be organized.

PTW: If I take time off, it will be the first week of March.  Perhaps David 
would like to come over on the second week.

Richard: Leah will be over on the first and second week.  She is on holiday for 
the third week.

Ought to look into event stuff about week of 1997-02-17.  Does that suit?

PTW: Yes.


Richard Tucker <RIT>

.rit: I've just finished designing and writing a suite of argument error 
tests.  The MPS doesn't fall over much, except with argument alignment errors.  
I've finished a set of protocol error tests where the user does things in the 
wrong order or in an inappropriate way.  There are a few things in Darwin 
arising from this.  These haven't uncovered many functional errors.  These have 
mostly come from Dylan.

NickB: EP came up with some.

RIT: They're not using the collector, anyway.

Richard: It might be worth our all having a look at the list of tests 
sometime.  Also we need to speak about how the test suite is organized.

RIT: I've delayed putting things in HOPE because I didn't want to have to 
change things.

I also need exemplars for how to determine that tests pass.

DRJ: Haven't you also got a problem with configuration and building?  I've 
tried to use your tests on NT and they needed hacking around.

RIT: That's ineveitable.  I might have to change to way the #include's work.  
Making it more portable.  I haven't looked at this yet.

DRJ: It will be quite a big job.

GavinM: How much of this is down to SunOs?

RIT: At the moment I've got a little file that fixes this, partly stolen from 
the MPS.

DRJ: I think you'll find it's quite a lot.

RIT: I'll try to arrange it into suites and it should be possible to run tests 
some of the time.

Richard: You also need to think about performance testing and attribute 
testing, particularly in Dylan.

RIT: There are two ways to do this: we could write programs to do Dylan type 
things; or we could run Dylan and see what happens.

Richard: If we dump a log, we should be able to replay it on Unix.  The only 
thing we can't do is the exact shape of objects on the heap.

RIT: That sounds useful.  Before that, any MM profiling tools will be very 
useful indeed.

Richard: The other thing is to look around for tools.  If you find something, 
we could look into buying it.

Do you have any idea when you'll be starting full-time?

RIT: I originally thought it would be the end of this month, but my supervisor 
things there is a lot of work to be done.  I have a horrible feeling it could 
drag on and on.


Richard Brooksby <Richard>

.richard: I've been talking to lots of people.  Tony came up with lots of extra 
requirements about weak tables and references.

I've been working on the tracer.  I've broken it down into 12 or 13 manageable 
steps.  After the second step, we get a rudimentary generational GC.  I think 
I'll abandon my current prototype and remake the changes in smaller steps, 
getting them reviewed.  I now feel 100 times more conifdent that it's all going 
to work.

I've been talking to David about the 4DRC, seeign what's going on and how we 
can use it.

I spoke to Louise Pryor.  I feel I've explained it enought times.  I've written 
up what I think the work should be.  Louise say they have lots of people doing 
nothing and not enought people to do anything.  At least we have something 
written down.  They should be able to give us some consultation on design.

I've given performance reviews to Gavin and Nick.

I've been looking at documentation stuff with Leah.

I've also been clearing a backlog of Important mail messages.  It piles up when 
I go on a trip.

Machine resources.  We might want a new Unix box to run Dylan code.  It might 
be too late if we wait for them to bootstrap the compiler.  We want to be ahead 
of the game.  We need a more powerful Unix box than deja-vu.  We also need a 
Unix box for Richard Tucker to do similar things on.  We need to sort that out 
with Mark.  

Tucker will need a PC to do any DUIM stuff.  He might need a Unix box as well.

PTW: I have run LispWorks on Nova, my "home" machine.  No-one screamed.

Richard: Why don't you try Lisp+Dylan on Nova?  Talk to Scott.  See if Judy 
hits the ceiling.  In the longer term you'll need a PC to do any Dylan stuff.  
What about the combined stuff?

PTW: I don't like the idea of being the pioneer on this.  It's a good idea from 
the point of view of desk-space and getting a whizzier Mac.  The Apple bundled 
system is good value; getting the PC card afterwards is not good value.

Richard: It compares well with getting a PC as well.

The Apple card isn't as good.

PTW: The Apple card is the same card.  Gary suggested I wait for the 120MHz 
Pentium.

Richard: You'll need the power initially, even if they get it better in the end.

Presumably you'll want to take this machine home?

PTW: I work more at home.

Richard: You might have to cart it back and forth a little.

NickB: How quickly are we likely to get a new SPARC box?

Richard: Not before April.

NickB: I can probably generate some SPARC cycles at the Hall on a temporary 
basis.

PTW: Running LispWorks remotely is quite excruciating.

Nickb: I've had no real problems running MLWorks and ScriptWorks remotely 
between House and Hall.

PTW: It's the dial-up line that has the trouble.

NickB: We'll be doing performance testing this side of the Atlantic.  We can 
scrounge it for the moment.

DRJ: I'd like a Mac.

NickB: There was talk of me getting a portable Mac.  My nice Mac could move to 
David's desk.

GavinM: I wouldn't mind a permanent Mac as well.  Mine is a loaner.

Richard: Mnemosyne was bought for me.

We'd all like Macs, but we are developing primarily for a PC.  It's nasty, but 
what can we do?  We could all have Macs, and a couple of shared PCs.  

NickB: I'm happy with a PC so long as it has an X server.  As long as I can run 
NT or Linux.

Richard: We got Nick a Mac because it was the SW platform of choice.  You'd 
need it for builds from time to time.  That would interrupt whoever was on it.

NickB: Doing SW builds on a Mac involves using MPW which is interface 
unfriendly.  It grabs keystrokes.  

PTW: As a POI, your Duo 280c costs exactly $1,000.

GavinM: Can I have one of them then?

Richard: Possibly.  We could buy up the old stock.

PTW: A Dock costs $489.  The 2300 PowerPC goes for $1,400with 8Mb.

Duo 280c 4Mb RAM 320Mb disc is $1000, b/w 280c 12Mb RAM 240Mb disc and modem is 
also $1000.

Richard: There's clearly lots of desires and needs here.  I don't have a 
budget.  We need to get Tucker his Mac+PC.  Unix box comes next.  Gavin seems 
to come after that.


NEXT MEETING

.next: Next Wednesday 14:00.

