              MM/EP-CORE REQUIREMENTS: DESIGN CONSTRAINTS
                             req.epcore.dc
                               draft doc
                           richard 1996-06-17

[This document is part of req.epcore.  It does not have its own revision 
number.]

Platform Constraints

.plat.sus8gc:
  Operate on SunOS 4.1.3/SPARC v8, with ScriptWorks compiled by GCC.
  Critical but not for SW 4.5 and on
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, 
mail.nick.1997-07-23.16-31

.plat.sos8gc:
  Operate on Solaris 2.5/SPARC v8, with ScriptWorks compiled by GCC.
  Critical
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52

.plat.sos9sc:
  Operate on Solaris 2.5/UltraSPARC (SPARC v9), with ScriptWorks compiled by 
SunPro C.
  Optional for SW 4.5 and on
  mail.richard.1996-08-23.21-07, mail.pekka.1998-02-16.15-57

.plat.i4m2cc:
  Operate on Irix 4.0.5/MIPS II, with ScriptWorks compiled by SGI's "cc".
  Critical but not for SW 4.5 and on
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52 , 
mail.nick.1997-07-23.16-31

.plat.i5m2cc:
  Operate on Irix 5.2/MIPS II, with ScriptWorks compiled by SGI's "cc".
  Critical for SW 4.5 and on
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, 
mail.pekka.1998-02-16.15-57

.plat.iam4cc:
  Operate on Irix 6 N32/MIPS IV, with ScriptWorks compiled by SGI's "cc".
  Critical
  mail.richard.1997-04-08.16-54

.plat.s760ac:
  Operate on Mac OS 7/Motorola 68000, with ScriptWorks compiled by Apple ETO 
compilers.
  Critical but not for SW 4.5 and on
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, 
mail.nick.1997-07-23.16-31

.plat.s7ppac:
  Operate on Mac OS 7/PowerPC, with ScriptWorks compiled by Apple ETO compilers.
  Critical
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52

.plat.w3i3mv:
  Operate on Win32s/Intel 386+, with ScriptWorks compiled by Microsoft Visual C.
  Critical
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52

.plat.w3almv:
  Operate on Windows NT/DEC Alpha, with ScriptWorks compiled by Microsoft 
Visual C.
  Critical
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52

.plat.w3ppmc:
  Operate on Windows NT/PowerPC, with ScriptWorks compiled by the Microsoft SDK 
C compiler.
  Critical
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.any32, mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52

.plat.multiproc.solaris:
  Operate on multiprocessor Solaris platforms.
  Critical.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.multiproc, conversation with Andy Cave 1996-07-04

.plat.multiproc.irix:
  Operate on multiprocessor Irix platforms.
  Critical.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.multiproc, conversation with Andy Cave 1996-07-04


Varieties

.variety:
  Multiple varieties of the Memory Manager shall be supplied. No single variety 
is required to meet both the debugging requirements .fun.debug.* and the 
run-time and throughput requirements .attr.run-time.* and .attr.tp.*.
  Essential
  mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, meeting.swig.1996-06-06

.variety.fast:
  One supplied variety of the Memory Manager may not meet the debugging 
requirements, but shall meet the run-time and throughput requirements.
  Critical
  mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, meeting.swig.1996-06-06

.variety.debug:
  One supplied variety of the Memory Manager may not meet the run-time and 
throughput requirements, but will run at "an acceptable speed" and shall meet 
the debugging requirements.
  Critical
  mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, meeting.swig.1996-06-06

.variety.debug.full:
  One supplied variety of the Memory Manager may not meet the run-time and 
throughput requirements, may run very slowly, and shall exceed the debugging 
requirements .fun.debug.*.
  Nice
  mail.kap.1996-05-24.15-52, meeting.swig.1996-06-06


Library Constraints

.lib.approved:
  Only call library functions from the RIP 'approved list'.  This list is found 
in the ScriptWorks Programmers' Reference.  The list in edition 1.3 is as 
follows:
"Standard Functions" : exit, bzero, bcopy, bcmp, strlen, strcmp, strcat, 
strcpy, strncmp, strncat, strncpy, abs, fabs, sqrt, sin, cos, tan, asin, acos, 
atan, atan2, pow, log10, log, anint
"Specialized Functions" : get_date, get_rtime, get_utime, cvt_real, 
cvt_decimal, cvt_hex.
The list is open to extension if the MM requires some additional 
readily-implementable function.
  Essential.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-08.env.lib, meeting.epcore.1996-02-08.note.functions, 
mail.nickb.1996-06-20.14-05


Client Constraints

.client.sw40:
  Work with ScriptWorks 4.0 and later.  Earlier releases of ScriptWorks need 
not be supported.
  Essential
  meeting.epcore.1996-01-25.review.req.target


Linkage Constraints

.link: This section defines a baseline method of delivery for the MM.  Other 
methods, such as integrating the build systems and providing source, are 
possible and will be considered.

.link.object:
  The Memory Manager shall be supplied as a set of linkable objects for the 
platform, compatible with the compiler used for ScriptWorks.
  Essential.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.env.c

.link.c.header:
  The Memory Manager shall be delivered with ISO C header files which declare 
its interface to the RIP.
  Essential.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.env.c

.link.c.macro:
  The Memory Manager interface headers may contain macros which must be 
compiled into the RIP.  So, RIP recompilation will be necessary to replace the 
MM.
  Essential.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.env.c

.link.obfusc: 
  The library (see .link.object) shall operate correctly whether or not its 
symbols are obfuscated using 'coffdrop' or a similar tool.
  Essential.
  meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.sec.strip, meeting.epcore.1995-08-10.env.strip

