                MEETING WITH DTB AND NICK ON 1997-07-30
                       meeting.epcore.1997-07-30
                             incomplete doc
                           gavinm 1997-07-30

.scope: This document records some details of today's meeting between Dave T 
Berry <DTB>, Nick Levine <Nick>, Pekka P. Pirinen <Pekka>, Richard Brooksby 
<Richard> and Nick Barnes <NickB>. See also mail.dtb.1997-07-31.18-32  which 
records the outcome in some detail.

.schedule: NickB presented the proposed schedule of MM releases to EP over the 
next 3 months. This was essentially as described already by 
mail.richard.1997-07-23.12-00  . 

.schedule.sprat: The sprat release may be rolled into tiddler, unless debugging 
requires it sooner - see mail.richard.1997-07-31.08-36 .

.schedule.platforms: Removal of platforms which are no longer supported can 
start at tiddler.

.schedule.counter: The counter-requirement is that some effort is needed by EP 
to revive Luke's old root-finding code. DTB said it was unclear who would be 
free to do this work. Simon Green is a possibility and might indeed be slated 
to become EP's "MM expert", but he also has involvement in fonts so nothing is 
definite yet.


.diagram: Dave drew this diagram on the whiteboard:
 - Nick's Print97 diagram 

ATTACHMENT
   "Nick's Print97 diagram"

