             NOTES FROM MM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCT MEETING
                        meeting.devel.1999-06-23
                             incomplete doc
                            tony 1999-06-23

1999-06-23 MM group meeting

Start 15:09

Present: David Jones <drj>, Pekka Pirinen <pekka>, Richard Tucker <rit>,
Tony Mann <tony>


NEWS

tony: I've spoken to Keith over the last week about what we should be
doing. The story basically is there's still uncertainty about what
is eventually going to happen, and in the presence of that uncertainty, we
should be carrying on as in the past with the same priorities. Or possibly
with a slightly higher priority for the EP stuff. That's the story now --
of course it could change in the next few weeks.

tony: The Dylan, Lisp and ASG groups are downsizing now. As I understand it
the terms of our funding are that there will be no more than 4 people
working on Dylan and Lisp combined. So some people are moving to EP. I
spoke to Keith about drj leaving MM group -- he is working with us on getting
someone else into the group. Possible candidates: Keith Dennison (Dylan),
Chris Gathercole (ASG), Martin (Lisp), Yehouda (Lisp), Paul Gardner (Lisp),
Keith Playford (Dylan), Jason Trenouth (Dylan). Almost all of them are keen
to move here. I've spoken to some of them.


RELEASES

* dylan

tony: I've spoken to Jonathan about the stack-scanning issue. He hadn't
heard about it before. He's requested a patch to go into the 2.0 release of
Dylan, which is expected to go out in mid-August. We might as well assume
that timescale is accurate. That means the latest ship date we'd have to
get anything to them for the final build would be the end of July. I guess
that means to QA by mid-July. It'd be a patch to jackdaw.

rit: Yes, that would be fairly quick to QA.

tony: Other thing I got from Jonathan: he was very keen to have some work
on heap statistics (which I'd offered to do for him). After that, his
priorities were first persistence, and after that, strategy.

pekka: A bit unfortunate for the large picture.

tony: Yep. We can arrange priorities differently if it affects our other
work. Strategy would benefit Java work, for example.


* java

tony: Pekka's requested that he carry on with the Java work. So drj's going
to hand over to both pekka and me, starting tomorrow?

drj: Yes.


* web, epcore, ddj

tony: I don't have any news to report on these releases.

pekka: I doubt that it's acceptable to DP&P that the next EP release is in
October.

tony: I agree. Of course there are moves afoot to get a third developer
into the group. Also, our priorities are likely to change.


PLAN

tony: Main changes are to reflect the fact that Pekka will be doing the
early JVM work, and to more accurately reflect drj's remaining time. Also,
I increased the priority of the next EP release over the future (i.e. not
the early) Java work.


AOB

tony: Workshop on Hardware Support for Java. It was suggested in the past
that we resurrect the stuff that Tucker mailed out about what we'd wnat
from an OS. Pretty much everything in that is stuff that stock hardware can
already do (though OS might not give you support). So what can we talk
about that's _really_ hardware related?

drj: Caches. E.g. Baker's paper on "Cache-Conscious GC".
pekka: Also "Caching considerations for generational GC", Wilson.

tony: btw, I won't be wanting to go personally.

tony: I guess we don't really have anything much to say about Realtime
Java. We should track what the J-consortium are proposing, but not do any
design or development on it, until management think it's likely to make
some money.

pekka: Hmm, true. Though it seems to me it wouldn't require very much work
at all. And a proposal which has an implementation has an advantage.

tony: So we should be able to jump pretty quickly should we feel the need
to. I'd agree that we should draw up a business plan for it, then perhaps
we can persuade Keith Passeretti that it's a good thing to do. I'll look 
into that.

tony: We discussed having a CORBA talk from Jason in the past. I was
chatting to Clive today, and he's done the same talk to Lisp clients
before. He volunteered to give it to us any time we would like it. I
suggested perhaps he'd like to do it next week. Would you like that?

pekka: Yes.

rit: Yes.

tony: Okay, I'll ask him to do that.


Finish 15:58.

